<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Whether you're having your first child or your third, it's definitely helpful to know what to expect along the way. At Main Line Health, we're committed to making your pregnancy and delivery the most positive experience possible. That's why we've created this guide full of information to help you prepare.

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

| Now that you're pregnant    |   2 |
|-----------------------------|-----|
| Preparing for your delivery |   4 |
| Your hospital stay          |  10 |
| Bringing your baby home     |  14 |
| Checklists                  |  16 |

## Hello and welcome!

We are delighted you have chosen Main Line Health for your maternity care and we are honored to be on this journey with you-from announcing the good news to friends and family to welcoming your little one into the world.

In our continued efforts to keep our patients and staff as safe as possible during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have suspended respite nursery service and will instead require that newborns stay in the room with the birth parent until the time of discharge. All newborn well-care will be provided at the bedside with the exception of some procedures, such as circumcision. Respite nursery service during evening hours allows new parents time to rest and recover before they return home and we hope to resume this valuable service in the future. However, as COVID-19 continues to spread in our community, it is important to take every step possible to minimize any potential risk of exposure to newborns. We understand that this can be a stressful and confusing time for our expectant parents. Please do not hesitate to call your OB/GYN provider with questions or concerns.

Now that you've decided to have your baby at a Main Line Health hospital, we want you to know we have an entire team of maternity care experts, including OB/ GYNs, maternal-fetal medicine specialists, maternity nurses, pediatricians, neonatologists, lactation consultants, nutrition counselors, social workers and therapists who are passionate about the health of moms, parents, babies and families. We also work closely with nurse-midwives and doulas (birth coaches) if you wish to have that extra support at any time during your pregnancy and labor. Main Line Health also has an affiliation with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). This brings together two well-respected, award-winning health systems focused on delivering exceptional, innovative clinical care to the communities we serve.

Please take advantage of the wonderful resources we offer, such as prenatal childbirth classes, prenatal breastfeeding classes, emotional wellness services and virtual maternity unit tours. We encourage you to learn as much as you can about pregnancy, labor and delivery, and the postpartum period so that you can have an optimal birth experience and also understand how best to care for yourself while caring for your new baby.

On behalf of the maternity care team at Main Line Health, we look forward to caring for you during this special time in your life.

From our Main Line Health family to yours,

## John J. Lynch

President and CEO, Main Line Health

## Joseph M. Gobern, MD

System Chair, Department of OB/GYN, Main Line Health

<!-- image -->

## Now that you' re pregnant

Congratulations from all of us at Main Line Health! No doubt you have a lot on your mind these days, including your own health and well-being and that of your baby or babies. We're here to lighten your load a bit and guide you through every stage of pregnancy, starting with your first appointment with your obstetrician (OB) or obstetrical care provider, who will be overseeing your care throughout your pregnancy.

## HOW TO DETERMINE WHETHER YOU ARE HIGH RISK

If your health status or family history increases the health risk to you or your baby (or babies) in pregnancy, Main Line Health provides testing and treatment at its perinatal testing centers. Expert perinatal staff members are available to help you and your family obtain accurate information about your developing baby (babies) and allow you to get the best care possible.

## HIGH-RISK PREGNANCY SERVICES AVAILABLE

Our maternal-fetal medicine specialists provide high-risk care through your pregnancy journey, alongside your OB/GYN. We offer prenatal genetic screening options including noninvasive pregnancy testing (NIPT) to help determine the risk of birth defects and/or genetic disorders. Prenatal diagnostic testing with chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis is also available in the perinatal testing centers along with an array of ultrasound services and nonstress test capabilities to monitor your baby throughout your pregnancy. We can provide consultation for any given maternal or fetal condition in the outpatient and inpatient setting. Our maternalfetal medicine doctors are also at the core of Main Line Health's gestational diabetes management program. This program includes nutrition counseling, self-blood glucose monitoring, and self-insulin administration. Main Line Health also provides home care services to help you manage your health throughout your pregnancy. For problems with pregnancy-related high blood pressure, services include support and teaching about self-blood pressure monitoring. Other services include teaching and support for those requiring progesterone injections or anticoagulant therapy injections.

## VISITING OUR PERINATAL TESTING CENTERS

The Main Line Health Perinatal Testing Centers provide state-of-the-art care and we are committed to giving every new baby the healthiest start possible. Whether you are expecting single birth or multiples, our perinatal testing centers provide ultrasounds and nonstress

## SCHEDULING YOUR FIRST APPOINTMENT

Once you find out you're pregnant, please be sure to schedule your first appointment with your obstetrical care provider. This appointment is usually around the time you are seven or eight weeks pregnant. In addition to the initial physical examination, your first visit will include a family and personal health history, instructions regarding your health during your pregnancy, and information regarding proper nutrition and exercise.

Come prepared to ask questions and to discuss any concerns you have. If possible, invite your partner or a friend or family member to come along for this important first visit. To find an obstetrical care provider and to schedule an appointment, call 1.866.CALL.MLH (225.5654) or visit mainlinehealth.org/maternity.

## WHAT TO DO IF YOU HAVE A HIGH-RISK PREGNANCY

If you are at risk for complications due to advanced maternal age (35+ years old), a genetic condition, having multiples or any medical complication, you're in good hands with the maternal-fetal medicine physicians at Main Line Health. These specialists work with obstetrical care providers to co-manage complex conditions before and during pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

testing to monitor the baby's heart rate. If needed, genetic counseling and consultative services with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, a team that includes neonatologists, pediatric cardiologists, pediatric surgeons and other specialists, are also available.

## GETTING AN ULTRASOUND

At Main Line Health, we provide obstetrical ultrasound services, including level I and level II abdominal ultrasound and transvaginal ultrasound, during which the transducer wand is inserted into the vagina for a better view of the cervix, placenta and early pregnancies. We also offer firsttrimester dating scans as well as first-trimester anatomy and nuchal translucency evaluation. Specialized doppler surveillance is available when needed.

Our ultrasound capabilities also include:

- Amniocentesis
- Chorionic villi sampling
- Noninvasive prenatal genetic screening

Ultrasound is a safe and easy way to monitor your baby's progress throughout your pregnancy. With ultrasound, we are also able to detect about 80 percent of birth defects (congenital anomalies).

Ultrasound scans will be conducted at regular intervals as part of routine obstetrical care during your pregnancy. Talk to your physician to determine the timing and frequency of your ultrasound appointments. To schedule an ultrasound at one of our Main Line Health locations, call 484.580.1800.

## REGISTERING WITH YOUR HOSPITAL'S LABOR AND DELIVERY SERVICE

Once you have confirmed your pregnancy, seen your obstetrical care provider and have a projected delivery date, you should register with your selected Main Line Health hospital's labor and delivery service so they can be prepared for your arrival. To do this easily online, visit mainlinehealth.org/maternity/register.

## ATTENDING PRENATAL AND CHILDBIRTH EDUCATION CLASSES

Main Line Health offers a variety of classes and programs to support you during your pregnancy and prepare you for childbirth and parenting (see pages 8-11).

## SELECTING A PEDIATRICIAN

Main Line Health offers more than 100 pediatricians to choose from. When making your choice, it's important to do your homework. We recommend talking to family, friends and colleagues. Take into consideration office locations convenient to home or work, physician availability, level of experience and philosophy of care. For more about pediatric services or for a physician referral, call 1.866.CALL.MLH (225.5654) or visit mainlinehealth.org/peds.

## EMOTIONAL WELLNESS SUPPORT

The Women's Emotional Wellness Center is a resource for women and their families before, during and after pregnancy or adoption. Our expert staff members provide outpatient mental health counseling and psychiatric services. To learn more, visit mainlinehealth.org/wewc.

## Preparing for your delivery

In the months before delivery you're sure to be feeling an amazing combination of excitement and anticipation. We expect you have a ton of questions and we're here to help best prepare you for the big day. Learning about the hospital, taking classes and making choices about your family's care are all important aspects of getting ready and staying healthy right now.

Here are some answers to frequently asked questions about preparing for delivery.

## HOW CAN I LEARN MORE ABOUT THE HOSPITAL WHERE I PLAN TO DELIVER?

You can learn about the hospital in which you plan to deliver by taking childbirth education classes there. You can also schedule a virtual tour of the hospital's maternity unit.

## HOW DO I LEARN ABOUT CHILDBIRTH?

Expectant parents should attend prenatal classes to learn about the labor and delivery process as well as newborn care. The more you prepare ahead of time, the more comfortable you'll be when the baby (or babies) arrive.

## WHEN SHOULD I TAKE CHILDBIRTH CLASSES?

Plan to attend prenatal classes during the second trimester just in case your baby comes sooner than expected. See pages 8 and 9 for a full list of offerings. Register early, class sizes are limited. To register, visit mainlinehealth.org/maternity.

## HOW MUCH ARE THE CLASSES?

At this time, all Main Line Health childbirth education classes are free of charge.

## IS THERE ANYTHING I CAN DO TO PREPARE FOR NURSING MY NEWBORN BEFORE MY BABY IS BORN?

Absolutely. One of the best things you can do is to ask questions about breastfeeding early and often throughout your pregnancy. The more you know in advance about what to expect, the greater your chances of success with chest/breastfeeding. To find an upcoming session, visit mainlinehealth.org/breastfeeding.

<!-- image -->

## DO I NEED TO SELECT A PEDIATRICIAN BEFORE GIVING BIRTH?

Yes. You must have a pediatrician who can begin overseeing your baby's care from the time of birth, and it's best to know who that's going to be before you come to the hospital. Do your homework:

- Talk to your obstetrician, family and friends for referrals and advice.
- Get information about the practice and the doctor(s). Main Line Health pediatricians offer prenatal visits, so set up a meeting to get to know them well before your due date.
- When you arrive at your selected hospital for delivery, let the staff know who your pediatrician will be.

During your hospital stay, another pediatrician from the Main Line Health medical staff may take care of your baby. You will then follow up with your own pediatrician when your baby is ready to go home. Be sure to ask your chosen pediatrician what the process is after your baby is born, as the situation may vary. Your pediatrician should see your baby within two days after discharge from the hospital.

## WHAT DO I DO WHEN I GO INTO LABOR?

In the months leading up to labor, check with your physician or ask a class leader during childbirth class about what the process is for when you start to go into labor and where you should enter the hospital when it's time to deliver. Also be sure to ask where you should enter the hospital if you go into labor during the night.

## WHAT IF I HAVE A HIGH-RISK COMPLICATION DURING MY STAY?

Main Line Health offers 24/7 consultative services from every department and discipline. If the complication is obstetrical, our maternal-fetal medicine specialists are always available to provide guidance and ultrasound capabilities.

## WHO WILL BE ALLOWED WITH ME DURING LABOR AND DELIVERY?

For the safety of mom and baby, we encourage having no more than two support people at the bedside, such as a partner, a parent, a close friend or a doula (birth coach). But it is entirely up to you. Talk this over with your obstetrical care provider to determine what is best for you. Waiting rooms are open around the clock for other family and friends.

## ARE THERE ANY REQUIREMENTS FOR MY SUPPORT PERSON?

Although it's not a requirement, we encourage you to attend childbirth education classes with your coach so that you are equally prepared for the exciting time ahead.

## WILL ANESTHESIA AND PAIN MEDICATION BE AVAILABLE TO ME?

Yes, epidurals and anesthesia are available and administered 24 hours a day, seven days a week by our anesthesiologists. Please consult your obstetrical care provider and anesthesia provider about pain management options.

## DO YOU OFFER GENTLE C-SECTION OR VAGINAL BIRTH AFTER CESAREAN (VBAC)?

At Main Line Health, we offer traditional cesarean delivery as well as 'gentle-C,' also known as familycentered cesarean. Vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) is an option for some women who have previously had a C-section. Be sure to talk with your obstetrical care provider in advance about these preferences and the options available to you. Not all obstetrical care providers perform these services.

Also keep in mind that a gentle-C may not be an option in surgical emergencies. By talking to your doctor in advance about what's important to you, he or she can try to accommodate your wishes and needs as much as possible, regardless of what type of birth you have. To learn more about gentle-C, visit mainlinehealth.org/ cesarean.

## WHERE CAN I ACCESS MY MEDICAL RECORDS?

Main Line Health offers a secure online hospital patient portal that gives you electronic access to important information included in your medical record, such as lab and radiology results, appointment requests, hospital discharge instructions and summary of hospital care. Visit mainlinehealth.org/connect to get started.

## Preparing for your delivery

## CAN WE VIDEO RECORD OUR BIRTH?

Unfortunately, video recording is not permitted in our delivery rooms. We ask that you limit photography/videography to before and after birth, not during.

<!-- image -->

## CAN A GUEST STAY WITH ME OVERNIGHT?

Yes. Our maternity rooms can accommodate one partner/family member to stay overnight. Your overnight guest must be at least 16 years old unless the person is a parent of the newborn.

## WILL THERE BE ACCESS TO WI-FI?

To ensure your comfort and convenience, all of the maternity units offer Wi-Fi.

## WILL THERE BE PROFESSIONAL PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN OF MY NEWBORN?

Yes, Bella Baby photography offers a team of experienced, professional photographers who will come to the hospital to capture your baby's first photograph with a natural, artistic style.

## Financial considerations

It's important to find out as much as you can about your health insurance coverage for pregnancy care and delivery. Every insurance provider is different and what is included or paid for by one may not be covered by another. Along the way, you will have copays (payments for doctor visits, for example) and you may have a deductible or a certain amount you must pay out-of-pocket before your provider begins to pay. Your hospital stay may be covered partially or in full, but this also varies from provider to provider.

Getting these facts in advance will help ease your mind during pregnancy and help you better prepare for payments you may need to make after you've come home from the hospital.

## WHAT HAPPENS WHEN MY POLICY REQUIRES PRIOR AUTHORIZATION?

If your insurance policy says it requires prior authorization, you need to ensure that your physician has obtained this authorization before you are admitted to the hospital. If authorization is required but not obtained, you could be responsible for the total hospital charges.

## HOW CAN I FIND OUT AND PREPARE FOR MY OUT-OF-POCKET LIABILITY?

Knowing before you deliver how much you will be responsible for paying will help you plan for the costs. If you are not sure what your out-of-pocket liability is, you can request an estimate by calling customer service or by going online. Call 484.337.1970 or visit mainlinehealth.org/patientbilling.

<!-- image -->

## HOW MUCH TIME DO I HAVE TO ADD MY BABY TO THE POLICY?

Most insurance companies require that a new child be added to the parent's policy within 30 days of birth. Failure to do so could result in your insurance company refusing to pay for the child's hospital and physician services. If this occurs, the patient or responsible party will be billed for the services. Call your insurance company ahead of time to determine when your new child should be added to the policy.

## WHAT HAPPENS IF I DO NOT HAVE INSURANCE COVERAGE?

For patients who qualify, Main Line Health offers charity care/financial assistance. Main Line Health financial counselors can assist you with the application. Call 484.337.1970 or visit mainlinehealth.org/charitycare.

## HOW WILL THE HOSPITAL HANDLE MY INSURANCE AND BILLING?

The hospital will bill your insurance company or companies. A valid insurance card is required at the time of your admission. Your estimated out-of-pocket liability is due at the time of admission unless you show evidence of a secondary insurance.

## GIVEN MAIN LINE HEALTH'S RELATIONSHIP WITH CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL OF PHILADELPHIA, WILL ANY BILLS COME FROM THEM?

Many deliveries at Main Line Health are attended by neonatal providers (physicians, physician assistants or nurse practitioners) from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). In the event you or your newborn requires care from a CHOP clinician during your hospital stay, you will receive a bill from CHOP.

Main Line Health requires a neonatal provider to attend cesarean section deliveries for the safety and well-being of the newborn. A neonatal provider may also be requested by the obstetrical care provider for certain deliveries, or may be required according to Main Line Health policy to attend vaginal deliveries where certain maternal conditions exist or there are concerns about the baby's health that may require immediate assessment. Ask your obstetrician if this is anticipated for your delivery.

If you do receive a bill from CHOP, please contact them directly with any questions. Call 1.800.879.2467.

## NEED ASSISTANCE?

Main Line Health customer service representatives are here to answer your questions Monday through Friday from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. Call 484.337.1970 or visit mainlinehealth.org/patientbilling.

<!-- image -->

## Preparing for your delivery

<!-- image -->

## Childbirth education classes

We offer a variety of virtual childbirth classes to help you, your partner and family learn about and become comfortable with the childbirth process. Our classes focus on all aspects of labor and delivery, including breathing and relaxation techniques, nursing and the role of a support person. We also provide virtual tours of our hospital maternity units.

To register for virtual classes and/or a hospital tour, visit mainlinehealth.org/maternity.

<!-- image -->

## PREPARED CHILDBIRTH SERIES

This two-part class focuses on the physical and emotional aspects of labor and delivery, with emphasis on breathing and relaxation techniques. The instructor will discuss: the natural progression of labor and delivery; coping strategies for labor, including medication and anesthesia options; the role of support person; and the possibility of cesarean birth. This class is offered to those expecting their first baby or those who have never attended childbirth classes. A virtual tour of the maternity unit can be scheduled separately.

## TOUR OF THE MATERNITY UNIT

This is a free virtual tour of the labor and delivery area, postpartum unit and newborn nursery with opportunity for Q&amp;A with a staff member. This tour should be scheduled around your 28th week of pregnancy. Tours fill up quickly, so please register early. Registration is required.

## LABOR COMFORT MEASURES

This interactive one-session class will be discussing comfort measures beyond breathing and relaxation that are taught during prepared childbirth classes. Topics to be discussed and practiced will include birth balls, massage and pressure points, hot and cold therapies, additional positions and nonmedical techniques for comfort and aid in the progression of labor and birth.

## WELCOMING BABY

This two-hour class helps the expectant parents and grandparents prepare for the new baby's arrival. A pediatrician or childbirth educator will speak on such topics as selecting a pediatrician, newborn immunizations and when to call the pediatrician. You'll learn tips to help you better understand  your newborn and gain important information on topics such as car seats, infant safety, safe sleep practices, poison prevention and choosing baby furniture.

## PRENATAL BREASTFEEDING CLASS

During this two-hour program, you'll learn breastfeeding techniques to get you off to a good start. You'll also learn ways to cope with common situations that can occur in the early weeks after your baby is born. We strongly encourage that a support person or family member attend this class with the expectant mother.

## AFTER BABY CONNECTIONS

Offered at the Women's Emotional Wellness Center at Main Line Health Newtown Square and King of Prussia, this group provides psychotherapy and support for women who welcome a new baby through those who have preschool-age children. Topics include techniques for:

- Coping with depression, anxiety and adjustment
- Effective postpartum communication with partner, family, loved ones
- Self-care and positive self-talk

You'll also meet other local parents for increased social support. If you are interested in After Baby Connections you will first be scheduled for a screening evaluation to determine if this group is the right fit for you. To schedule your evaluation, please call 1.888.227.3898 . Treatment is covered by most commercial insurance plans and Medicaid. To learn more, visit mainlinehealth.org/wewc.

## Breastfeeding mothers ' groups

Come join us for an opportunity to speak with other breastfeeding mothers, share your experiences and check your baby's weight. At no cost to you, our internationally board-certified lactation consultants can provide personalized support and care including information about:

-  Basic breastfeeding
-  Positioning and latching the baby at the breast
-  Dealing with difficulties that may arise
-  Breastfeeding twins or triplets
-  Breastfeeding a premature or special needs baby
-  Breastfeeding even when medical issues arise with mom or baby
-  Continuing to breastfeed after going back to work or school

There is no charge for our breastfeeding groups and no reservations are necessary. Breastfeeding babies and their siblings are welcome.

If you have questions about breastfeeding, call our warmline at 484.565.8075. A boardcertified lactation consultant will return your message promptly.

## Your hospital stay

At Main Line Health, we've designed our state-ofthe-art maternity units to be the next best thing to home for you and your family. From attractive rooms to personalized care from our highly attentive maternity staff, our focus is on making your stay as comfortable as possible.

No matter which Main Line Health hospital you choose, you can be assured of a family-centered childbirth experience backed by a strong clinical team. In addition to your obstetrical care provider, a team of anesthesiologists, neonatologists, maternity and neonatal nurses, and pediatric specialists is here to help you identify the best birthing options for you and your baby or babies.

## STATE-OF-THE-ART MATERNITY SUITES

Lankenau Medical Center, Bryn Mawr Hospital, Paoli Hospital and Riddle Hospital have an LDR (labor deliver recovery) model where the patient labors in one room and then is transferred to a postpartum room.

For birthparents who choose to nurse their infant, we have lactation consultants at each of our hospitals who will educate and assist in establishing breastfeeding and provide ongoing support after you are discharged.

For specific information regarding your labor and delivery unit, we encourage you to schedule a virtual maternity unit tour at the Main Line Health hospital that you have chosen. During your visit you will learn where to enter the hospital and how to get to the delivery suite when you go into labor.

## WHO WILL BE ALLOWED WITH ME DURING POSTPARTUM?

Due to COVID-19 restrictions, we are currently allowing one support person and one additional visitor during the postpartum period. Support person must be the same person from admission to discharge. Visitors should adhere to the visiting hours of 11:00 am-7:00 pm. They may leave and return, preferably during visiting hours. For the most current COVID-19 policies visit mainlinehealth.org/maternitycovid for updates.

## WILL I HAVE A PRIVATE ROOM?

It is our intent for each patient to have a personalized experience. We continue to modify and expand our facilities to ensure a private room for every patient.

## DOES THE HOSPITAL SUPPORT COUPLE/FAMILYCENTERED CARE?

We encourage rooming-in with your baby (referred to as couplet care) to help establish a closer postpartum bonding. Your familiar voice and loving touch calms your little one like no one else can. Your postpartum stay gives you the opportunity to build confidence as a parent. Our staff is here to support you through your baby's first night and offer tips to soothe your child at home.

## WILL I HAVE THE SAME NURSE WHILE IN THE POSTPARTUM UNIT?

Our nurses work in shifts. During each shift, you will have one nurse dedicated to your care. Our nurses are here to offer personal attention to each mom and baby, making sure you're comfortable and helping you with breastfeeding, swaddling, holding your baby and more.

<!-- image -->

## WHY IS SKIN-TO-SKIN CONTACT IMPORTANT?

Babies who cuddle skin-to-skin:

- Smell you, hear you and feel you
- Stay warmer
- Are calmer and cry less
- Breastfeed better
- Enjoy special bonding time

## HOW SOON CAN I START BREASTFEEDING AFTER MY BABY IS BORN?

You can start breastfeeding as soon as you and your baby are ready. For cesarean births, this could be done during the recovery period. Our nurses receive ongoing education on breastfeeding, including positioning, proper latching and pumping.

Main Line Health physicians encourage moms to breastfeed because research shows it has numerous health benefits over formula. If you cannot or choose not to breastfeed, our staff will support you in providing an appropriate formula for your child.

## IF I HAVE A BABY BOY, SHOULD HE BE CIRCUMCISED?

The American Academy of Pediatrics has not found sufficient supporting evidence to medically recommend circumcision or argue against it. Despite the possible benefits and risks, circumcision is neither essential nor detrimental to your son's health. Typically the decision to circumcise is based on religious beliefs, concerns about hygiene or various other cultural or social factors. No one should pressure you into making a decision one way or another regarding circumcision.

Before deciding, it is helpful to understand the risks and benefits, and how the procedure is performed. Hospital circumcisions are usually done in the first one to two days after your baby is born.

## WHAT NEWBORN SCREENINGS WILL BE PERFORMED?

Newborn screening identifies conditions that can affect a child's long-term health or survival. Early detection, diagnosis and intervention can prevent death or disability and enable children to reach their full potential. Each year, millions of babies in the U.S. are routinely screened, using a few drops of blood from the newborn's heel, for certain genetic, endocrine and metabolic disorders. Babies are also tested for hearing loss and critical congenital heart defects (CCHDs) prior to discharge from a hospital or birthing center. For more information, visit cdc.gov/newbornscreening.

<!-- image -->

## Your hospital stay

<!-- image -->

## SHOULD I ASK MY VISITORS TO WASH THEIR HANDS BEFORE HOLDING MY BABY?

Yes. Inside or out of the hospital, washing your hands with soap and water is one of the best ways to prevent the spread of disease or infection. At the hospital we commonly provide alcohol-based hand sanitizers as well. When you return home, you should continue to request that visitors wash hands before holding your baby. Hand sanitizers may be used but do not provide better protection. Visitors should be prepared to show a valid ID when entering a Main Line Health hospital.

## HOW DOES MAIN LINE HEALTH ENSURE THE SECURITY OF MY BABY?

Several security measures are in place at our hospitals to ensure the safety of your baby. The nursing staff will review all safety procedures with you. For your baby's protection, it is important that we know who is visiting and where your baby is at all times. Always ask to see identification and do not allow anyone without identification to take your baby from the hospital room. All babies wear a security tag during their stay.

## NEONATAL INTENSIVE CARE UNITS (NICUs)

Most problems of the premature newborn or full-term, high-risk newborns are temporary and correctable. Often babies just need time to develop immature body systems or overcome an illness. In the event your baby is premature or has medical problems at the time of birth, the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), staffed by experts from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) at each Main Line Health hospital, provides intense monitoring and a daily regimen of care to help your baby.

At all Main Line Health hospitals, neonatologists, advanced practice providers, hospitalists and physician assistants from CHOP are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The units are also staffed by respiratory therapists, social workers and pharmacists whose primary responsibilities are to provide care and services to babies.

## What emotional support services are available?

Welcoming a new baby is a life-changing experience and we are aware of the many physical and emotional needs you may have during and following childbirth.

Emotional difficulties during pregnancy and in the postpartum period are treatable with professional assistance. Asking for help is the first step in feeling better. Please know there is support for you and your family.

Maternity social workers and nurses assist moms in this process and provide resources and emotional support. Our team utilizes the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale to screen patients while in the hospital as a way to tend to patients' physical and emotional needs after

Each year our four NICUs care for hundreds of babies who are premature or low birth weight or have medical problems such as immature lungs or other health issues. We provide different levels of care at each of our Main Line Health hospitals.

There are some instances in which babies with specific conditions may need a higher level of care. This would require them to be transferred to another Main Line Health hospital or Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

delivery. Patients are offered a post-discharge phone call made by our expert staff at the Women's Emotional Wellness Center as a way to embrace mom and family with continued support once discharged to home.

The Women's Emotional Wellness Center at Main Line Health Newtown Square and King of Prussia provides outpatient mental health treatment and psychiatric services to women and their families.

The Women's Emotional Wellness Center's Nest Program specializes in the period before, during and after pregnancy, but also provides support for fathers, grandparents and other caregivers. Treatment is covered by most commercial insurance plans and Medicaid.

To learn more, visit mainlinehealth.org/wewc.

## REQUESTING A COPY OF YOUR CHILD'S BIRTH CERTIFICATE

You will complete birth certificate paperwork during your hospital stay, and a birth certificate will automatically be mailed to you in six to eight weeks. A Social Security card is also included in this process.

<!-- image -->

## Bringing baby home

It's time to head back home with a whole new life to celebrate, love and enjoy! We're here to help you have a successful transition, ensuring a smooth checkout and providing the resources to support healthy parenting and continued wellbeing for you and your newborn.

## DO YOU OFFER HOME VISITS?

If your insurance plan covers well-birthparent/well-baby visits, a home care nurse will visit you in the hospital when you are being discharged to discuss this option with you. Our nurses are Certified Breastfeeding Counselors who are able to provide lactation support if needed.

If your baby is jaundiced (hyperbilirubinemia) and needs blood draws or home phototherapy per physician's orders, a home care nurse will visit and care for your baby at home. You may also receive home care if your baby was born prematurely and is stable (i.e., if your baby can suck, swallow and is gaining weight on his/her own.)

## WHAT KIND OF POSTPARTUM SUPPORT DO YOU HAVE FOR BIRTHPARENTS WHO'VE HAD A C-SECTION?

As part of our home care services, we provide wound care and teach wound care techniques to women who have had a C-section. Our home care services include wound care management if there have been complications with healing.

## WHO CAN I CONTACT WITH QUESTIONS?

As you transition back home, your physicians are available to help you heal as well as support you in caring for your baby. For your own personal care, you are encouraged to follow up with your obstetrical care provider. For your baby's health, your pediatrician will answer questions and address concerns as your baby develops.

You can also find answers to common questions about newborn care and development at chop.edu, the trusted source for physician-reviewed information and advice on children's health and parenting issues.

## WHAT IF I HAVEN'T SELECTED A PEDIATRICIAN YET?

In case you have not made a choice by the time your baby is born, a pediatrician will be assigned to your baby's care. You may continue care with this pediatrician or choose another doctor after discharge, but starting and continuing with the doctor you have selected provides the greatest continuity of care.

With more than 100 pediatricians and pediatric specialists caring for newborns to teens and working in collaboration with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia to bring specialized pediatric care services to the area, our talented health care team has the knowledge and experience to treat the most common to the most complicated childhood ailments and conditions.

To find a pediatrician, call 1.866.CALL.MLH (225.5654) or visit mainlinehealth.org/pediatrics

## DID YOU KNOW

Four out of five infant car seats are not installed correctly?

Be absolutely sure yours is safe by having it inspected and installed for free by a certified child passenger safety seat technician.

For more information, visit mainlinehealth.org/events.

To find a location for a car seat check near you, call 1.800.CAR.BELT (227.2358).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## WHEN SHOULD I SCHEDULE OUR FIRST PEDIATRICIAN APPOINTMENT?

Your baby will be seen by a pediatrician while in the hospital. If you and your baby are discharged in one to two days, it's important that you schedule a follow-up visit right away and have your baby seen within two days of discharge from the hospital. If you and your baby are discharged on day three or four, the follow-up visit should be within two to three days. If you have difficulty scheduling the appointment within this timeframe, make sure that the pediatrician caring for your baby in the hospital is aware of your particular circumstance.

Early follow-up is very important to prevent severe jaundice, check on the adequacy of breastfeeding, and look for other problems that can develop in the first days after you leave the hospital. Main Line Health pediatricians are very familiar with these issues and work closely with the neonatologists and pediatric hospitalists in case there is a problem that requires readmission to the hospital.

## PEDIATRIC EMERGENCY SERVICES

Main Line Health collaborates with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) for both neonatal and pediatric specialty care. In addition, Bryn Mawr Hospital has a specially staffed pediatric emergency department. Every Main Line Health hospital has access to CHOP

Main Line Health's Women's Emotional Wellness Center offers a variety of psychotherapy groups for women ages 18 and older with focus on:

- Welcoming new baby through preschool-age children
- Coping with depression, anxiety, adjustment
- Learning helpful communication techniques
- Practicing regular self-care and positive self-talk
- Meeting other women for social support
- Meditation and mindful activities to promote health and well-being

For more information, call 1.888.CARE.898 (227.3898) or visit mainlinehealth.org/wewc.

Transport, an emergency transport system designed to safely transport children when the advanced pediatric services of a children's hospital are required.

Bryn Mawr Hospital and CHOP have collaborated to provide exceptional health care for children as close to home as possible. At Bryn Mawr Hospital, our pediatric unit provides 24-hour care and monitoring by specially trained pediatric professionals.

When more specialized care is required, we can provide you with immediate access to care at CHOP. For ongoing specialty care, a full range of pediatric specialists from CHOP are conveniently located at Main Line Health Newtown Square and Bryn Mawr Medical Arts Pavilion outpatient locations.

## Checklists

## NOW THAT I'M PREGNANT, WHAT SHOULD I DO TO PREPARE?

- F Consider taking a prenatal vitamin with folic acid and iron to reduce the risk of birth defects. /Off
- F Schedule your first appointment with your obstetrical care provider. Typically the doctor will see you when you're seven or eight weeks pregnant (the second half of your first trimester). /Off
- F Start to research hospitals where you'd like to deliver your baby. /Off
- F Take a virtual maternity unit tour of hospitals you're interested in. /Off
- F Register with your selected Main Line Health hospital's labor and delivery service. To do this easily online, visit mainlinehealth.org/maternity/register. /Off
- F Select your pediatrician. /Off
- F Look into your coverage for maternity leave information (if you're employed). /Off
- F Review your insurance coverage. /Off
- F Enroll in childbirth education classes. /Off
- F Call your pharmacist to determine if medications, supplements, vitamins and/or herbs are safe to continue to use during your pregnancy. /Off
- F Take good care of yourself emotionally during pregnancy and in the postpartum period; ask for help if needed. /Off
- F Make a plan for assistance from friends and family during the postpartum period. /Off

## ASK YOUR INSURANCE COMPANY

These questions will help you plan your payments and file any necessary paperwork before your hospital stay.

- F Does my policy cover maternity? /Off
- F Does my policy reimburse me for expenses such as a breast pump and childbirth education classes? /Off
- F Does my policy cover babies, including well-baby or sick-baby coverage? /Off
- F Will my policy cover a neonatal provider from CHOP to attend my delivery if necessary? /Off
- F Does my policy require prior authorization? /Off
- F How much time do I have to add my baby to the policy after I've delivered? /Off
- F Does my policy cover a well-birthparent/well-baby home visit? /Off
- F Does my policy cover lactation consultation services? /Off

<!-- image -->

## ASK YOUR OBSTETRICAL CARE PROVIDER

- F How many coaches can I have in the delivery room with me? /Off
- F How will I know it's time to go to the hospital? /Off
- F How do I reach you in an emergency or when I go into labor? /Off
- F Do you have any specific instructions for when I get to the hospital? /Off
- F When will you see me once I'm admitted? /Off
- F What is our plan for epidurals and anesthesia? /Off
- F Who will deliver my baby if you are not available when I go into labor? /Off
- F What happens if you need to induce my labor? /Off
- F What situation would cause you to perform a cesarean section? /Off
- F What would happen next if I need a cesarean section? /Off
- F Will a neonatal provider need to attend my delivery? /Off

## ASK YOUR NURSE

- F How soon can I get started on breastfeeding and who might help me learn? /Off
- F What kinds of screening tests will be performed on my baby and how soon will I know the results? /Off
- F What are my options if I experience pain after labor? /Off
- F How can I ensure my baby's safety and security? /Off
- F What is your visitation policy for children coming to the maternity unit? /Off
- F What supplies will be provided to me at discharge? /Off

## WHAT TO PACK

- F Personal identification and insurance information /Off
- F Phone numbers (family, friends and physicians) /Off
- F Phone charger with long cord to reach your bed /Off
- F Toiletries (toothpaste and toothbrush, shampoo and soap, glasses and contact lenses, lip balm, makeup) /Off
- F Comfortable clothing for your stay (bathrobe, nightgown, socks and slippers) /Off
- F Books, music, magazines /Off
- F Change of clothes for your birth partner /Off
- F Snacks and money for vending machine, cafeteria and other incidentals /Off
- F Baby blanket and going-home outfit for your baby /Off
- F Car seat (installed and inspected) /Off

To save this checklist to your mobile device or tablet, visit mainlinehealth.org/checklist

<!-- image -->

mainlinehealth.org/maternity | 1.866.CALL.MLH (225.5654)

<!-- image -->