## ● Medications, Breastfeeding &amp; Preg Nancy

by Dr. Alexandria M. Borden

- Not all medications are safe to take while pregnant or breastfeeding.
- Certain medications should be avoided during pregnancy since they can cause serious harm to your baby.
- You, your physician and pharmacist can determine if the benefits of taking a medication outweigh any potential risks to your baby.

<!-- image -->

## ● Preg Nancy &amp; Foot and Ankle Health

by Dr. Crystal Murray Holmes

Hormone changes during pregnancy cause skin, ligaments, and other soft tissue structures to expand. This swelling can involve the hands, face, gums, legs, ankles, and feet.

<!-- image -->

Some helpful management tips include:

- Wear flexible, breathable shoes
- Avoid tight socks and stockings
- Elevate feet and rest
- Drink plenty of fluid and avoid dehydration
- Minimize salt intake

## ● Preg Nancy, Dental Health &amp; Male Fertility

By Dr. Dawud O. Lankford

Men with poor oral health are more likely to face male factor infertility.

- High levels of bacteria in the mouth may lead to increased levels of bacteria in other areas of the body.
- Bacteriospermia is when a bacterial infection is found in semen.
- Some research has found that treating cavities and oral infection has led to a reduction or elimination of bacteriospermia.

<!-- image -->

●

## Post Preg Nancy &amp; Your Infant's New Teeth

by Dr. Sterling Roberts

- Schedule your child's dental appointment once the first tooth erupts or by the first birthday!
- Teeth or no teeth, it is important to remove all milk, including breast milk residue from the gums, cheeks and tongue.
- Parents must also maintain their own oral health.

<!-- image -->

●

## Oral Body Art &amp; Preg Nancy

By: Deborah L. Cartee, RDH, MS and Marion C. Manski, RDH, MS

Pregnant and nursing women should be made aware of complications that can be caused by piercings. Oral (mouth) piercings can interfere with speaking,

<!-- image -->

eating, and may cause excessive salivating (drooling). Damage to the teeth and gums can occur. Piercings may become infected.  Nipple piercing can impair breastfeeding. Jewelry should be removed before nursing to avoid possible trauma to the lips, tongue, gums, or palate of infants.  Jewelry parts can be aspirated and swallowed by the infant. If you do choose to express yourself with piercings good oral hygiene is essential including (1) brushing 2x/day, (2) flossing 1x/day, (3) and using antimicrobial rinses. Promptly see your dentist if you have teeth and gum tissue damaged by your mouth jewelry.

Please refer to the online brochure to: (1) read more detailed information from our experts, (2) to access the list of reference sources, and (3) to refer to the glossary of terms at www.mycohi.org.

<!-- image -->

My dental practice welcomes the opportunity to be your baby's dentist!

Please accept my business card and schedule this appointment today.

<!-- image -->

## Preg Nancy Together ™

The importance of maintaining the health of your mouth and teeth during pregnancy

## DEVELOPED BY

The Children's Oral Health Institute with content contributed by national health care experts

SPONSORED BY

<!-- image -->

## PregNancy Together ™

## Teeth to Toes

Pregnancy is a time for expecting mothers to evaluate and improve their well-being. This brochure is dedicated to educating and empowering pregnant women and families. Beginning from conception, learn about the correlation between pregnancy, oral health and systemic health.

<!-- image -->

Preg Nancy Together has been developed by The Children's Oral Health Institute as an endearing resource for expectant parents with content compiled by highly respected health care experts. The importance of preventive behaviors, maintenance and management of the expectant mother's health and the developing fetus is discussed throughout.

To read more, visit Preg Nancy Together at www.mycohi.org.

## ● Preg Nancy, Healthy Eating &amp; Baby's Developing Teeth

<!-- image -->

by Dr. Alisha Reynolds and Dr. Marianna Wetherill

Children's primary teeth begin forming at about the sixth week of pregnancy.

## You Must Eat Right

Important nutrients for prenatal tooth development include Calcium, Vitamin A &amp; Beta Carotene, Vitamin C, Phosphorous, Vitamin D, and Protein.

- First Trimester: Be sure to take your prenatal vitamin each day and eat foods rich in the above nutrients.
- Second Trimester: Most women will now need between 60 and 72 g protein per day to support healthy tissue building for their baby.
- Third Trimester: Protein needs are now higher, with 81 to 93 g per day being right for most women.
- Throughout pregnancy: Water is a nutrient! Most women need to drink 10 cups per day.

## ● Preg Nancy &amp; Maintaining Your Dental Health

by Dr. Cynthia E. Hodge

There is a connection between a mother's and a child's teeth as bacteria can be passed between mother and baby. This makes it easier for children to get cavities.

To minimize having your child deal with cavities, ensure that you maintain your

<!-- image -->

dental health, including:

- Keep your regular dental checkups.
- Floss between your teeth once a day.
- Brush with a fluoride toothpaste 2x each day.
- Rinse with water or with a fluoride rinse after vomiting, and remember NOT to brush your teeth right after vomiting, wait about 30-60 minutes.

## ● Diabetes, Pre-eclampsia, Dental Health &amp; Preg Nancy

by Dr. Robert C. Greenwell, Jr.

- Pregnant women with periodontal disease are more likely to develop gestational diabetes mellitus than pregnant women with healthy gums.
- Pregnant women with severe gum disease are more than twice as likely to have preeclampsia compared to women with healthy gums.
- Routine dental exams are very important, because pregnancy causes hormonal changes that may put you at increased risk for periodontal disease.

<!-- image -->

## True or false?

- Calcium is not taken from the mother's teeth for the baby's growth. This is provided through the mother's diet and if it is inadequate, then it is taken from the mother's bone.
- It is not true that you lose a tooth for every pregnancy. Decay is often the cause of this tooth loss.
- It is true that some antibiotics can reduce the effectiveness of birth control pills and patches. This can result in an unplanned pregnancy.

## ● Preg Nancy, Oral Health &amp; Human Papilloma Virus

<!-- image -->

by Dr. Teresa P. Diaz-Montes

Oral human papilloma virus (HPV) is transmitted to the mouth by oral sex. If you are exposed, let your dentist know.

Some symptoms to watch for include:

- Lasting sore throat
- Hoarseness
- Pain when swallowing
- Earaches
- Swollen lymph nodes

HPV infection can be prevented by the practice of safe sex and vaccination.

## ● Preg Nancy &amp; Periodontal Health

by Dr. Louise T. Veselicky

During pregnancy, there are hormonal changes that may lead to changes in the plaque

<!-- image -->

that forms on the teeth and gums.

- Avoid allowing plaque to remain on the teeth.
- Bleeding gums are a sign of inflammation of the gums.
- Gingivitis is reversible with good oral hygiene (brushing and flossing) as well as regular professional preventive dental care.

## ● Preg Nancy &amp; Postpartum Depression

by Ms. Shelly Bray

<!-- image -->

Postpartum Depression falls under a broader category of maternal mental health, known as Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders (PMADs). Symptoms of PMADS can occur anytime during pregnancy or after birth, more commonly beginning during the first year after delivery. Symptoms can include:

- Feeling sad or depressed
- Not feeling like yourself
- Having difficulty bonding with your baby
- Not eating and brushing

Good news-help is available! Visit www.postpartum.net.