<!-- image -->

## HIGHLIGHTS OF COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT CHANGES AS A RESULT OF THE PRICE DECISION and ITEMS IN AGREEMENT BETWEEN ONA and PARTICIPATING HOSPITALS

TERM:

APRIL 1, 2025, TO MARCH 31, 2027

## 1.  COMPENSATION AND WAGES

- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2025: 3.0% across-the-board increases for all classifications.
- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2026: 2.25% across-the-board increases for all classifications.

## RN Salary Grid (Full-time)

- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2025, $40.24 to $57.68
- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2026, $41.15 to $58.98

## RN Salary Grid (part-time including percent in lieu of benefits)

- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2025, $45.87 to $65.76
- /L50539 Effective April 1, 2026, $46.91 to $67.24

| STEP    | CURRENT   | APRIL 1, 2025 3%   | APRIL 1, 2026 2.25%   |
|---------|-----------|--------------------|-----------------------|
| Start   | $39.07    | $40.24             | $41.15                |
| 1 Year  | $40.05    | $41.25             | $42.18                |
| 2 Years | $41.06    | $42.29             | $43.24                |
| 3 Years | $42.90    | $44.19             | $45.18                |
| 4 Years | $44.83    | $46.17             | $47.21                |
| 5 Years | $47.07    | $48.48             | $49.57                |
| 6 Years | $49.42    | $50.90             | $52.05                |
| 7 Years | $51.89    | $53.45             | $54.65                |
| 8 Years | $56.00    | $57.68             | $58.98                |

| STEP    | APRIL 1, 2025 14% IN LIEU   | APRIL 1, 2025 10% IN LIEU   | APRIL 1, 2026 14% IN LIEU   | APRIL 1, 2026 10% IN LIEU   |
|---------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Start   | $45.87                      | $44.26                      | $46.91                      | $45.27                      |
| 1 Year  | $47.03                      | $45.38                      | $48.09                      | $46.40                      |
| 2 Years | $48.21                      | $46.52                      | $49.29                      | $47.56                      |
| 3 Years | $50.38                      | $48.61                      | $51.51                      | $49.70                      |
| 4 Years | $52.63                      | $50.79                      | $53.82                      | $51.93                      |
| 5 Years | $55.27                      | $53.33                      | $56.51                      | $54.53                      |
| 6 Years | $58.03                      | $55.99                      | $59.34                      | $57.26                      |
| 7 Years | $60.93                      | $58.80                      | $62.30                      | $60.12                      |
| 8 Years | $65.76                      | $63.45                      | $67.24                      | $64.88                      |

<!-- image -->

## Nurse Practitioner Wage Grid - NEW - establishment of a minimum wage grid for NPs

- /L50539 Effective September 3, 2025, all Participating Hospitals to revise their wage grids, if necessary, to ensure that it takes no more than 8 years to reach the top of the grid (i.e. maximum of 9 steps with the start rate).
- /L50539 Effective September 3, 2025, any NPs whose hourly rate, after the 3.0% GWI, is lower than the minimum hourly rate for their years of service set out in the chart below, will move to the applicable minimum hourly rate.

## RPN Wage Grid - NEW - establishment of a Provincial RPN wage grid

| STEP    | NEWGRID   | APRIL 1, 2025 3%   | APRIL 1, 2026 2.25%   |
|---------|-----------|--------------------|-----------------------|
| Start   | $38.11    | $39.25             | $40.13                |
| 1 Year  | $38.62    | $39.78             | $40.68                |
| 2 Years | $39.14    | $40.31             | $41.22                |

- /L50539 Article 19.01 (d) - will then be applied, effective April 1, 2025, and as usual on April 1, 2026.
- /L50539 Article 19.10 - Retroactivity will be paid within four full pay periods from September 3, 2025, based on hours worked. The last date that retroactivity should be paid is November 12, 2025. Dates will vary depending on where your next pay cycle starts. The retroactive pay should be based on hours paid.

## 2.  OTHER COMPENSATION

- /L50539 Article 11.07 (f) And 11.08 (e)-Pregnancy and Parental Leaves - Supplemental Unemployment Benefit increased for those on pregnancy and parental leave from 84% to 93% effective the date of award.
- /L50539 Article 13.01 (a) - Effective November 1, 2025, 15 minutes of report time at the end of a shift will be paid at same rate as the shift worked.
- /L50539 Article 17.01 (f) - increase coverage for crowns, bridgework, implants and repairs to $2500.00 from $2000.oo. Increase coverage for orthodontics to $2500.00 from $2000.00.

## 3.  JOB POSTINGS

- /L50539 Article 10.07 (a) i) and ii) - Amended to include that permanent full-time and part-time vacancies shall be posted within 60 consecutive calendar days.
- /L50539 Article 10.07 (e) - Specific time limited temporary positions- Positions can be posted no greater than one year. And the term may be extended to a further one year with mutual agreement.

## 4.  LEAVES OF ABSENCE

- /L50539 Article 11.15 Domestic Sexual Violence Leave -Expansion of the language to include the recognition of intimate partner violence which includes the various ways the violence is manifested. Language includes that the Hospitals must uphold the precautionary principle to protect the nurses and Hospitals will offer supports and services.

## 5.  HEALTH AND SAFETY

- /L50539 Article 6.05 (e) viii) - amended language to strengthen and clearly identify it is about a nurse's exposure, not only when the Hospital 'identifies' the exposure that the nurses will be provided with the necessary medications at no cost.

| STEP    | SEPTEMBER 3, 2025   |
|---------|---------------------|
| Start   | $63.66              |
| 1 Year  | $66.19              |
| 2 Years | $68.08              |
| 3 Years | $69.57              |
| 4 Years | $71.38              |
| 5 Years | $72.31              |
| 6 Years | $72.95              |
| 7 Years | $73.50              |
| 8 Years | $74.46              |

<!-- image -->

## HIGHLIGHTS OF COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT CHANGES AS A RESULT OF THE PRICE DECISION and ITEMS IN AGREEMENT BETWEEN ONA and PARTICIPATING HOSPITALS

## 6.  HUMAN RIGHTS

- /L50539 Article 3.04 (a) and (b) - amended to update language to reflect the appropriate provisions of the Human Rights Code.
- /L50539 Article 3.04 (d) - addition of language to ensure a response in writing on the outcome of the investigation and that it is completed in a timely manner.
- /L50539 Article 3.04 (h) - amended language strengthens the provisions for training and education programs when dealing with harassment and discrimination.

## 7.   DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSIVITY

- /L50539 Letter of Understanding re: Commitment to Diversity, Equity, Inclusivity  Amendments which include general guidelines for the committee to follow and focus on creating workplaces that are reflective of the diverse communities they serve. Language commits the parties to developing and making an equitable working environment that is inclusive for all patients and staff .

## 8. ADMINISTRATIVE, EDITORIAL AND HOUSEKEEPING

- /L50539 Throughout the collective agreement change Central to Provincial.
- /L50539 Remove effective dates that are no longer applicable
- /L50539 Appendix 1 - Insert updated ONA Grievance form
- /L50539 Article 2.03 - deletion of temporary RN language, RNs with temporary class certification are paid pursuant to Article 19.02
- /L50539 Article 3.05 - additional language to incorporate relevant legislation.
- /L50539 Article 5.03 - delete Vice-President, Local Finance replace with Provincial Treasurer
- /L50539 Article 5.05 - delete Vice-President, Local Finance replace with Provincial Treasurer addition of language for personal emails of members if available.
- /L50539 Article 10.07 (d) (i) - amended to clarify the provisions of the collective agreement as they relate to part-time members as well as nomenclature change. Deletion of language covered in Article 10.16 (b).
- /L50539 Article 10.16 (b) - amended language simplifies the Article and information required to be provided to the Union. This change does not amend or change what information is to be provided to Union.
- /L50539 Article 13.03 Innovative Unit Scheduling - amended language to include proper nomenclature and specific examples including 4 on and 5 off.
- /L50539 Article 17.01 (h) - deletion outdated language.
- /L50539 Article 21.02 - deletion of language as the committee was ineffective.
- /L50539 Letter of Understanding RE Casual nurses with seniority prior to 1981 (10.02 (c) i) - deletion of outdated language. Language to address any casual nurses that were impacted parties are to meet within 60 days of the award.
- /L50539 Letter of Understanding RE Article 12.06 - deletion of outdated language. Hospitals will provide disclosure within sixty days of those who were on staff and in LTD other than the 1980 plan.
- /L50539 Renewal of Letter of Understandings.