## Steps to a Healthier me and baby-to-be!

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

You have thought about your goals for school, for your job or career and for your health. You have also thought about how having children fits in with those goals, and you have decided that you want to become pregnant. Your health before pregnancy is very important and can affect the health of your future baby. By making a plan before getting pregnant and taking the time to get healthy, you can take the steps to a healthier you and baby-to-be. This is a tool to help you do that.

Start by choosing your goals for this year. It is easier to focus on 2-3 goals. Then use the checklist below to set your plan into motion.

Date plan made or revised:

My top 3 goals for this year are

1.

2.

3.

<!-- image -->

Check with your health insurance plan to find out if your eligible for preventive health services, such as screening, vaccinations, contraception (birth control) and counseling, with no co-payment or deductible. To learn more, 'talk with your health insurance provider. If you don't have insurance, you may be eligible for services through Title V (https://mchb.hrsa.gov/maternal-child-health-initiatives).

## 1.  Plan pregnancies.

/Off

Decide which goals to meet before having childrenschool, work, financial.

/Off

/Off

/Off

Use contraception (birth control) correctly and at all times until we are ready to get pregnant.

I use

I will talk with my doctor (or nurse practitioner, nurse midwife, physician assistant) if I have new health issues or am taking medicines that might affect my method of contraception.

I will talk with my doctor about when and how to stop using my contraception.

## Make sure I have my chosen method of contraception.

IUD or implant.

Depo-Provera (contraceptive shot).

Birth control pills, patch, or ring.

Condoms.

Spermicidal gel, cream, foam, suppository, or sponge.

Diaphragm or cervical cap: Make sure it fits properly, there are no holes, and I use it every time.

Remove, replace, update, refill, or get more by

## Think about my goals for children.

I want to have                         child or children.

I want to get pregnant when I am                       years old.

I want to have children                years apart. ( At least 18 months apart is recommended. )

I want to finish having children when I am          years old.

## Make a regular appointment with my doctor.

My next appointment is

I will talk with my doctor about the prescribed and over-thecounter drugs I am taking and which ones I need to stop or change.

Reminder! Take this with me to the appointment.

/Off

/Off

## 2.  Eat healthy foods.

Planning meals and snacks ahead of time and having the food on hand make it less likely that I will make unhealthy choices.

/Off

Make a list before I go to the grocery store, farm stand or market, or neighborhood garden.

/Off

Include plenty of vegetables and fruits. (Eat my colors!)

/Off

Shop the outside edge of the store where the healthiest food is sold.

## 3.  Be active.

Exercise is easier with a friend. Fitting in several 10-minute activity sessions throughout the day can help me reach my activity goal.

/Off

Try to get 150 minutes of moderate intensity physical activity each week.

At

( times-after lunch, after work, etc. )

By

( walking, going to the gym, etc. )

<!-- image -->

## 3.  Be active. (continued)

/Off

/Off

My exercise friend.

My exercise friend is

Find ways to be active at home and at work.

Walk outside during lunch.

Other

## 4.  Take 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid daliy.

Folic acid is good for my health. Taking it daily will help prevent birth defects of the brain and spine when I decide to or if I get pregnant before I am ready.

/Off

Take a vitamin with folic acid every day unless I eat a serving of breakfast cereal that says it has 400 mcg of folic acid on the nutrition label.

/Off

Place vitamins by my toothbrush or on the kitchen counter or to help me remember to take them daily.

## 5.  Protect myself from sexually transmitted infections (STIs).

/Off

If I choose to have sex

/Off

/Off

/Off

/Off

Agree to have sex with only one person who has agreed to have sex with only me.

Buy a supply of condoms, and use them correctly and every time.

Get checked if I have been exposed to STIs. http://www.cdc.gov/std/healthcomm/the-facts.htm.

If needed, take all the medicine for the full time as directed by my doctor.

.

## 6.  Protect myself from other infections.

/Off

Wash my hands frequently with soap and water.

<!-- image -->

/Off

Ask my partner to change the cat litter.

/Off

/Off

Stay away from people who are sick.

Try not to share food, drinks, or utensils with young children.

7.  Avoid harmful chemicals, metals, and other toxic substances around the home and in the workplace.

https://prhe.ucsf.edu/toxic-matters

## 8.  Make sure my vaccinations (shots) are up-to-date.

Vaccinations are our best defense against many diseases. Sometimes, those diseases can cause serious problems. I want to protect myself against those diseases.

/Off

/Off

/Off

/Off

/Off

Remember to get a flu shot every year, especially if I am pregnant.

Check the vaccination schedule before I see my doctor http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/easy-to-read/ adult.html.

I need

Remind my doctor to update my vaccinations.

My appointment is

## 9. Manage and reduce stress and get mentally healthy.

/Off

Learn more about getting mentally healthy.

http://www.womenshealth.gov/mental-health/ http://www.nimh.nih.gov/index.shtml

<!-- image -->

## 9.  Manage and reduce stress and get mentally healthy. (continued)

/Off

Be aware of things that cause me stress.

/Off

/Off

Make a plan to reduce my stress.

Get enough rest.

Exercise to lift my mood.

Limit alcohol and avoid cigarettes and other drugs.

Find a support person or group, if needed.

My support person or group is

## 10. Stop Smoking.

Smoking is not healthy for me or others around me. I want to be healthy! Secondhand smoke is not healthy either. I will avoid being around people when they smoke and will ask my partner not to smoke around me. Smoking can cause problems such as difficulty getting pregnant, separation of the placenta from the womb too early resulting in bleeding, placenta covering the cervix which can cause bleeding, and the water breaking too early. Problems for the baby include being born too small, being born too early, dying before birth or after birth, sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), and possible birth defects.

/Off

/Off

/Off

Make an appointment with my doctor to talk about help for this.

My appointment is

Find a support person or group for additional help.

Contact information for support

Check out  www.BeTobaccoFree.gov and http://smokefree.gov/

Call 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-7848-669)

## 11. Stop using certain drugs or prescription medicine that are not mine.

Taking drugs not prescribed for me is not good for me or my baby-to-be. There are different effects depending on the drugs used. I want my baby and me to be as healthy as possible!

/Off

/Off

Make an appointment with my doctor to talk about help for this.

My appointment is

Find a support person or group for additional help.

Contact information for support

## 12. Stop drinking alcohol if I am trying to get pregnant.

Drinking alcoholic drinks when trying to get pregnant and during pregnancy can cause problems for me and my baby. http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fasd/.

/Off

Stop drinking when I start trying to get pregnant and right away if I find myself pregnant before planned. Drinking during pregnancy can cause birth defects. There is no known safe level of alcohol in pregnancy.

/Off

Make an appointment with my doctor if I need help to stop drinking.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 13. Stop partner violence.

Abuse can be emotional, physical, or sexual. No one deserves to be abused. I love myself and my child or children enough to take steps to deal with violence if it should happen to me or my family.

/Off

/Off

/Off

Talk with my doctor.

Talk with a counselor.

Make a plan.

Call the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-799-SAFE (7233) or 1-800-787-3224 (TDD).

## 14. Manage my health conditions, such as asthma, diabetes, or overweight.

/Off

Learn more about my health condition(s).

/Off

/Off

Talk with my doctor about a plan to manage my health condition(s) and my medicines.

My appointment is

Find a support person or group to help me with the plan.

My support person's or group contact information is

We meet

( when and where )

## 15. Learn about my family's health history.

Learning about health problems in my family can help my doctor and me determine which problems to look for and how to prevent or deal with them.

/Off

Ask my parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, and cousins about any health problems in the family.

/Off

/Off

Keep a record of my findings.

Update yearly.

## 16. Get regular checkups. See my doctor as needed for other problems.

My doctors' names and phone numbers are

/Off

/Off

Schedule my yearly appointment.

My appointment is

Schedule an appointment to talk with my doctor about

My appointment is

## Questions to ask my doctor.

Your health before pregnancy is important. Keep this checklist handy and look at it regularly, update it, and talk with your partner and your doctor about how to best put this plan into action. Remember to take this tool with you to your appointment. Make time for yourself. Your baby will thank you for it.

<!-- image -->