## MOVE YOUR WAY

<!-- image -->

PREGNANCY

## What's your move?

Physical activity during pregnancy is safe and healthy - for you and your baby. And did you know it can help you feel better right away?

<!-- image -->

Boost your mood

<!-- image -->

Sharpen your focus

Reduce your stress

<!-- image -->

Improve your sleep

<!-- image -->

## So get more active - and start feeling better today.

Getting active can even make your labor shorter and recovery faster . Plus, it can make it less likely you'll have complications like:

- Gestational diabetes (a type of diabetes that happens during pregnancy)
- Preeclampsia (a condition that causes high blood pressure and other problems)
- Postpartum depression

## How much activity do I need?

## Moderate-intensity aerobic activity

Anything that gets your heart beating faster counts.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Muscle-strengthening activity

Do activities that make your muscles work harder than usual.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Is that more than you can do right now? Start with just 5 minutes. It all adds up!

## What's safe during pregnancy?

Lots of activities are safe! Just avoid:

- Contact sports and anything where you could fall or get hit in the belly
- Lying flat on your back during activity after the first trimester (it causes problems with blood flow)

You can find ways to adapt your favorite physical activities - like propping yourself up with a pillow when you'd normally be on your back.

## Listen to your body.

If an activity doesn't feel right, try something else! Remember, lots of things count so find a way that works for you.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

And if you're not sure where to start, try adding a bit more walking to your day. Walking is safe and easy, and you can do it almost anywhere.

## More questions? Talk with your doctor.

<!-- image -->

Prenatal checkups are a great time to talk about physical activity. Try asking these questions:

- How can being active help me have a healthier pregnancy?
- What activities would you recommend for me?
- Are there any activities I should avoid?

## You can get more active.

No matter how active you were before pregnancy, or what stage of pregnancy you're at - you can find your move.

Find tips to get moving and build a weekly activity plan.

health.gov/MoveYourWay/Activity-Planner

<!-- image -->