## Chapter

1

## /H17039 PREGNANCY

Pregnancy is the state of having products of conception implanted normally or abnormally in the uterus or  occasionally  elsewhere. Pregnancy  is  terminated by  spontaneous  or  elective  abortion  or  delivery. A myriad  of  physiologic  changes  occur  in  a  pregnant woman, which affect every organ system.

## Diagnosis

In a patient who has regular menstrual cycles and is sexually active, a period delayed by more than a few days  to  a  week  is  suggestive  of  pregnancy. Even  at this early stage, patients may exhibit signs and symptoms  of  pregnancy. The  classic  finding  of 'morning sickness' can  begin  this  early  and  often  continues through  12  to  16  weeks  of  gestation. On physical examination, a variety of findings indicate pregnancy (Table 1-1).

Many  over-the-counter  (OTC)  urine  pregnancy tests  have  a  high  sensitivity  and  will  be  positive around the time of the missed menstrual cycle.These urine tests and the hospital laboratory serum assays test for the beta subunit of human  chorionic gonadotropin ( b -hCG). This hormone produced by the placenta will rise to a peak of 100,000mIU/mL by 10 weeks  of gestation, decrease  throughout the second trimester, and then level off at approximately  20,000  to  30,000mIU/mL  in  the  third trimester.

A  viable  pregnancy  can  be  confirmed  by  ultrasound, which may show the gestational sac as early as 5 weeks, or at a b -hCG of 1500 to 2000mIU/mL, and the fetal heart as soon as 6 weeks, or a b -hCG of 5000 to 6000mIU/mL.

Chapter 1  /  Emergency Management: Evaluation of the Critically Ill or Injured Child

## Pregnancy and Prenatal Care

## Terms and Definitions

From the time of fertilization until the pregnancy is 8 weeks along (10 weeks gestational age [GA]), the conceptus is called an embryo . After 8 weeks until the time of birth, it is designated a fetus . The term infant is used for the period between delivery and 1 year of age. Pregnancy is divided into trimesters. The first trimester lasts until 12 weeks but is also defined as up to 14 weeks GA, the second trimester from 12 to  14  until  24  to  28  weeks  GA, and  the third trimester from  24  to  28  weeks  until  delivery. An infant  delivered  prior  to  24  weeks  is  considered  to be previable , from  24  to  37  weeks  is  considered preterm , and from 37 to 42 weeks is considered term . A pregnancy carried beyond 42 weeks is considered postdate or postterm .

Gravidity (G) refers  to  the  number  of  times  a woman has been pregnant, and parity (P)  refers  to the number of pregnancies that led to a birth beyond 20  weeks  GA  or  of  an  infant  weighing  more  than 500g. A more specific designation of pregnancy outcomes divides them into term and preterm deliveries, number  of abortuses , and  number  of living children. This is known as the TPAL designation. A woman who has given birth to one set of preterm twins, one  term  infant, and  with  two  miscarriages would be a G4 P1-1-2-3. A multiple gestation is just one delivery but obviously may change the number of living children by more than one. In this designation, abortuses includes both therapeutic and spontaneous abortions.

## Dating of Pregnancy

The  GA  of  a  fetus  is  the  age  in  weeks  and  days measured  from  the  last  menstrual  period  (LMP).

•

1

•

## /H17039 TABLE 1-1

| Signs and Symptoms of Pregnancy                                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Signs Bluish discoloration of vagina and cervix (Chadwick's sign)         |
| Softening and cyanosis of the cervix at or after 4 weeks (Goodell's sign) |
| Softening of the uterus after 6 weeks (Ladin's sign)                      |
| Breast swelling and tenderness                                            |
| Development of the linea nigra from umbilicus to pubis                    |
| Telangiectasias                                                           |
| Palmar erythema                                                           |
| Symptoms                                                                  |
| Amenorrhea                                                                |
| Nausea and vomiting                                                       |
| Breast pain                                                               |
| Quickening-fetal movement                                                 |

Developmental age (DA) is the number of weeks and days since fertilization. Because fertilization usually occurs about 14 days after the first day of the prior menstrual period, the GA is 2 weeks more than the DA.

Classically, Nägele's rule for  calculating  the estimated date of confinement (EDC), or estimated date of delivery (EDD), is to subtract 3 months from the LMP and add 7 days.Thus, a pregnancy with an LMP of  4/13/02  would  have  an  EDC  of  1/20/03. Exact dating  uses  an  EDC  calculated  as  280  days  after  a certain LMP. If the date of ovulation is known, as in assisted  reproductive  technology  (ART), the  EDC can be calculated by adding 266 days.This dating can be  confirmed  and  should  be  consistent  with  the examination of the uterine size at the first prenatal appointment.

With an uncertain LMP, ultrasound is often used to  determine  the  EDC. Ultrasound  has  a  level  of uncertainty that increases during the pregnancy but it is rarely off by more than 7% to 8% at any GA. A safe rule of thumb is that the ultrasound should not differ from LMP dating by more than 1 week in the first trimester, 2 weeks in the second trimester, and 3 weeks in the third trimester. The dating done with crown-rump  length  in  the  first  half  of  the  first trimester is probably even more accurate, to within 3 to 5 days.

Other measures used to estimate gestational age include pregnancy landmarks such as auscultation of the  fetal  heart  (FH)  at  20  weeks  by  nonelectronic fetoscopy  or  at  10  weeks  by  Doppler  ultrasound, as  well  as  maternal  awareness  of  fetal  movement or  'quickening,' which  occurs  between  16  and  20 weeks.

## Physiology of Pregnancy

## Cardiovascular

During pregnancy, cardiac output increases by 30% to  50%. Most increases occur during the first trimester, with the maximum being reached between 20  and  24  weeks  gestation  and  maintained  until delivery. Systemic vascular resistance decreases during pregnancy, resulting in a fall in arterial blood pressure. This decrease is most likely due to the elevated progesterone leading to smooth muscle relaxation. There is a decrease in systolic blood pressure of  5-10mm  Hg  and  in  diastolic  blood  pressure  of 10-15mm Hg that nadirs at week 24. Between 24 weeks  gestation  and  term, blood  pressure  slowly returns  to  prepregnancy  levels  but  should  never exceed them.

## Pulmonary

There is an increase of 30% to 40% in tidal volume (VT) during pregnancy (Figure 1-1) despite the fact that the total lung capacity is decreased by 5% due to the elevation of the diaphragm. This increase in V T decreases  the  expiratory  reserve  volume  by  about 20%. The increase in VT with a constant respiratory rate leads to an increase in minute ventilation of 30% to 40%, which in turn leads to an increase in alveolar (PAo2 ) and arterial (Pao 2 ) Po 2 levels and a decrease in PAco2 and Paco2 levels.

Paco2 decreases to approximately 30mm Hg by 20 weeks gestation from 40mm Hg prepregnancy. This change leads to an increased CO2 gradient between mother  and  fetus  and  is  likely  caused  by  elevated progesterone levels that either increase the respiratory  system's  responsiveness  to  CO2 or  act  as  a primary stimulant. Dyspnea of pregnancy occurs in 60% to 70% of patients. This is possibly secondary to decreased  Paco2 levels, increased  VT, or  decreased total lung capacity (TLC).

## Gastrointestinal

Nausea  and  vomiting  occur  in  more  than  70%  of pregnancies. This  has  been  termed 'morning  sickness' even though it can occur anytime throughout the day. These symptoms have been attributed to the

<!-- image -->

TLC-total lung capacity

VC-vital capacity IC-inspiratory capacity FRC-functional residual capacity IRV-inspiratory reserve volume TV-tidal volume ERV-expiratory reserve RV- residual volume

Figure 1-1· Lung volumes in nonpregnant and pregnant women.

elevation  in  estrogen, progesterone, and  hCG. The nausea  and  vomiting  should  routinely  resolve  by 14  to  16  weeks  gestation. During  pregnancy, the stomach has prolonged gastric emptying times, and the  gastroesophageal  sphincter  has  decreased  tone. Together, these changes lead to reflux and possibly combine  with  decreased  esophageal  tone  to  cause ptyalism, or  spitting, during  pregnancy. The  large bowel  also  has  decreased  motility, which  leads  to increased water absorption and constipation.

## Renal

The kidneys actually increase in size and the ureters dilate during pregnancy, which may lead to increased rates of pyelonephritis. The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) increases  by  50%  early  in  pregnancy  and  is maintained  until  delivery. As  a  result  of  increased GFR, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine decrease by about  25%. An  increase  in  the  renin-angiotensin system leads to increased levels of aldosterone. This ultimately  results  in  increased  sodium  resorption. However, plasma  levels  of  sodium  do  not  increase because of the simultaneous increase in GFR.

## Hematology

Although  the  plasma  volume  increases  by  50%  in pregnancy, the  red  blood  cell  volume  increases  by only 20% to 30%, which leads to a decrease in the hematocrit. The  white  blood  cell  (WBC)  count increases during pregnancy  to  a  mean  of  10.5 million/mL  with  a  range  of  6  to  16. During  labor, stress may cause the WBC count to rise to over 20 million/mL. There is a slight decrease in the concentration of platelets, probably secondary to increased plasma volume and an increase in peripheral destruc- tion. Although 7% to 8% of patients' platelets may be between 100 and 150 million/mL, a drop in the platelet count below 100 million/mL or over a short time period is not normal and should be investigated promptly.

Pregnancy is considered to be a hypercoagulable state, and  the  number  of  thromboembolic  events increases. There  are  elevations  in  the  levels  of  fibrinogen  and  factors  VII-X. However, the  actual clotting  and  bleeding  times  do  not  change. The increased  rate  of  thromboembolic  events  in  pregnancy  may  be  secondary  to  an  increase  in  venous stasis and vessel endothelial damage.

## Endocrine

Pregnancy is a hyperestrogenic state. The increased estrogen is produced primarily by the placenta, with the  ovaries  contributing  to  a  lesser  degree. Unlike estrogen  production  in  the  ovaries, where  estrogen precursors  are  produced  in  ovarian  theca  cells  and transferred to the ovarian granulosa cells, estrogen in the placenta is derived from circulating plasma-borne precursors produced by the maternal adrenal glands. Fetal  well-being  has  been  correlated  with  maternal serum estrogen levels with low estrogen levels being associated  with  conditions  such  as  fetal  death  and anencephaly.

The hormone hCG is composed of two dissimilar alpha and beta subunits. The alpha subunit of hCG is  identical  to  the  alpha  subunits  of  luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and  thyroid-stimulating  hormone  (TSH), whereas the beta subunits differ. The placenta produces hCG, which acts to maintain progesterone production by the corpus luteum. Levels of hCG double approxi-

•

4

•

mately every 48 hours during early pregnancy, reaching  a  peak  at  approximately  10  to  12  weeks, and thereafter declining to reach a steady state after week 15.

Human placental lactogen (hPL) is  produced  in the placenta and is important for ensuring a constant nutrient  supply  to  the  fetus. hPL, also  known  as human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS), causes  lipolysis  with  a  concomitant  increase  in  circulating free fatty acids. hPL also acts as an insulin antagonist, along  with  various  other  placental  hormones, thereby  having  a  diabetogenic  effect. This leads to increased  levels of  insulin  and  protein synthesis.

Progesterone  is  produced  by  the  corpus  luteum during early pregnancy, after which time biosynthesis occurs primarily in the placenta. Progesterone precursors are derived  from  low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol  and  progesterone  levels  increase  over the course of pregnancy. Progesterone causes relaxation of smooth muscle, which has multiple effects on the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and genitourinary systems.

High estrogen levels cause an increase in thyroid binding globulin (TBG). Placental hormones such as hCG  may  also  have  thyroid-stimulating  properties that lead to an elevation in total T3 and T4. Together, these  changes  lead  to  a  relatively  euthyroid  state, although free T3 and T4 levels may decrease slightly during  pregnancy. Levels  of  prolactin  are  markedly increased  during  pregnancy. These  levels  paradoxically  decrease  after  delivery  but  later  increase  in response to suckling.

## Musculoskeletal and Dermatologic

The obvious change in the center of gravity during pregnancy can lead to a shift in posture and lower back  strain. Numerous  changes  in  the  skin  occur during  pregnancy, including  spider  angiomata  and palmar  erythema  secondary  to  increased  estrogen levels  and  hyperpigmentation  of  the  nipples, umbilicus, abdominal  midline  (the linea  nigra ), perineum, and  face  ( melasma or chloasma )  secondary to increased levels of a -melanocyte-stimulating hormone and the steroid hormones.

## Nutrition

Nutritional requirements increase during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The  average  woman  requires 2000  to  2500kcal/day. The  caloric  requirement is  increased  by  300kcal/day  during  pregnancy  and by 500kcal/day when breast-feeding. Most patients should gain between 20 and 30 pounds during pregnancy. Obese  women  are  advised  to  gain less, between 15 and 20 pounds; thin women are advised to gain slightly more, 25 to 35 pounds.

In addition to the increased caloric requirements, there are increased nutritional  requirements  for protein, iron, folate, calcium, and other vitamins and minerals. The  protein  requirement  increases  from 60g/day to  70  or  75g/day. Recommended  calcium intake is 1.5g/day. Many  patients develop iron deficiency  anemia  because  of  the  increased  demand  on  hematopoiesis  both  by  the  mother  and the fetus. Folate requirements increase from 0.4 to 0.8mg/day and are  important  in  preventing  neural tube defects.

All patients are advised to take prenatal vitamins during pregnancy. These are designed to compensate for the increased nutritional demands of pregnancy. Furthermore, any  patient  whose  hematocrit  falls during pregnancy is advised to increase iron intake with oral supplementation (Table 1-2).

## KEY POINTS

1. A urine pregnancy test will often be positive at the time of the missed menstrual cycle.
2. Physiologic changes during pregnancy, mediated by the placental hormones, affect every organ system.
3. Cardiovascular changes include a decrease in systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure and a 50% rise in total blood volume.
4. Elevation in serum progesterone levels is respon-
5. sible for smooth muscle relaxation in the vascular system, GI tract, and genitourinary system, leading to many of the concomitant physiologic changes.

## /H17039 PRENATAL CARE

Prenatal visits are designed to screen for various complications of pregnancy and to educate the patient. They include a series of outpatient office visits that involve  routine  physical  examinations  and  various screening tests that occur at different points in the prenatal care. Important  issues  of prenatal  care include  initial  patient  evaluation, routine  patient evaluation, nutrition, disease states during the pregnancy, and preparing for the delivery.

## /H17039 TABLE 1-2

|                         | NonpregnantWomen by Age   | NonpregnantWomen by Age   | NonpregnantWomen by Age   | NonpregnantWomen by Age   | NonpregnantWomen by Age   | Pregnant Women         | Lactating Women        |
|-------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
|                         | 11-14                     | 15-18                     | 19-22                     | 23-50                     | 51 +                      | Pregnant Women         | Lactating Women        |
| Energy (kcal)           | 2400                      | 2100                      | 2100                      | 2000                      | 1800                      | + 300                  | + 500                  |
| Protein (g)             | 44                        | 48                        | 46                        | 46                        | 46                        | + 30                   | + 20                   |
| Fat-soluble vitamins    | Fat-soluble vitamins      | Fat-soluble vitamins      | Fat-soluble vitamins      | Fat-soluble vitamins      | Fat-soluble vitamins      | Fat-soluble vitamins   | Fat-soluble vitamins   |
| Vitamin A activity (RE) | 800                       | 800                       | 800                       | 800                       | 800                       | 1000                   | 1200                   |
| (IU)                    | 4000                      | 4000                      | 4000                      | 4000                      | 4000                      | 5000                   | 6000                   |
| Vitamin D (IU)          | 400                       | 400                       | 400                       | -                         | -                         | 400                    | 400                    |
| Vitamin E activity (IU) | 12                        | 12                        | 12                        | 12                        | 12                        | 15                     | 15                     |
| Water-soluble vitamins  | Water-soluble vitamins    | Water-soluble vitamins    | Water-soluble vitamins    | Water-soluble vitamins    | Water-soluble vitamins    | Water-soluble vitamins | Water-soluble vitamins |
| Ascorbic acid (mg)      | 45                        | 45                        | 45                        | 45                        | 45                        | 60                     | 80                     |
| Folacin ( m g)          | 400                       | 400                       | 400                       | 400                       | 400                       | 800                    | 600                    |
| Niacin (mg)             | 16                        | 14                        | 14                        | 13                        | 12                        | + 2                    | + 4                    |
| Riboflavin (mg)         | 1.3                       | 1.4                       | 1.4                       | 1.2                       | 1.1                       | + 0.3                  | + 0.5                  |
| Thiamin (mg)            | 1.2                       | 1.1                       | 1.1                       | 1                         | 1                         | + 0.3                  | + 0.3                  |
| Vitamin B 6 (mg)        | 1.6                       | 2                         | 2                         | 2                         | 2                         | 2.5                    | 2.5                    |
| Vitamin B 12 ( m g)     | 3                         | 3                         | 3                         | 3                         | 3                         | 4                      | 4                      |
| Minerals                | Minerals                  | Minerals                  | Minerals                  | Minerals                  | Minerals                  | Minerals               | Minerals               |
| Calcium (mg)            | 1200                      | 1200                      | 800                       | 800                       | 800                       | 1200                   | 1200                   |
| Iodine ( m g)           | 115                       | 115                       | 100                       | 100                       | 80                        | 125                    | 150                    |
| Iron (mg)               | 18                        | 18                        | 18                        | 18                        | 10                        | + 18                   | 18                     |
| Magnesium (mg)          | 300                       | 300                       | 300                       | 300                       | 300                       | 450                    | 450                    |
| Phosphorus (mg)         | 1200                      | 1200                      | 800                       | 800                       | 800                       | 1200                   | 1200                   |
| Zinc (mg)               | 15                        | 15                        | 15                        | 15                        | 15                        | 20                     | 25                     |

## Initial Visit

This is often the longest of the prenatal visits because it involves obtaining a complete history and doing a physical as well as a battery of initial laboratory tests. It should occur early in the first trimester, between 6 and 10 weeks, although occasionally patients will not present  for  their  initial  prenatal  visit  until  later  in their pregnancy.

## History

The patient's history includes the present pregnancy, the last menstrual period, and symptoms during the pregnancy. After  this, an  obstetric  history  of  prior pregnancies including date, outcome  (e.g., SAB [spontaneous abortion], TAB [therapeutic abortion], term  delivery), mode  of  delivery, length  of  time in  labor  and  second  stage, birth  weight, and  any complications. Finally, a complete medical, surgical, family, and social history should be obtained.

## Physical Examination

A  complete  physical  examination  is  performed, paying  particular  attention  to  the  patient's  prior medical and surgical history. The pelvic examination includes a Pap smear, unless one has been done in the past  6  months, and  cultures  for  gonorrhea  and chlamydia. On bimanual examination, the size of the uterus should be consistent with the gestational age from the LMP.

## Diagnostic Evaluation

The  panel  of  tests  in  the  first  trimester  includes  a complete  blood  count, primarily  for  hematocrit, blood  type, antibody  screen, rapid  plasma  reagin

•

(RPR), rubella  antibody  screen, hepatitis  B  surface antigen, urinalysis, and urine culture. If a patient has no history of chickenpox, a titer for varicella zoster virus  (VZV)  antibodies  is  sent. A  purified  protein derivative (PPD) is usually placed during the first or second trimester. A urine pregnancy test should be sent if the patient is not entirely certain she is pregnant. If there has been any bleeding or cramping, a b -hCG level should be obtained. While there is some debate over the use of routine toxoplasma titers, they are often ordered as well. All patients are counseled about  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  and testing  should  be  offered  routinely  (Table  1-3). In addition to this  battery  of  tests, there  are  a  variety of other screens offered to high-risk patients (Table 1-4).

## Routine Prenatal Visits

On each follow-up prenatal care visit blood pressure, weight, urine  dipstick, measurement  of  the  uterus, and auscultation of the fetal heart are performed and assessed. Maternal  blood  pressure  decreases  during the first and second trimester and slowly returns to baseline during the third trimester; elevation may be a sign of preeclampsia. Maternal weight is followed serially throughout the pregnancy as a proxy for adequate nutrition. Also, large weight gains toward the end of pregnancy can be a sign of fluid retention and preeclampsia. Measurement  of  the  uterine  fundal height  in  centimeters  corresponds  roughly  to  the weeks of gestation. If  the  fundal  height  is  progressively decreasing or is 3 cm less than gestational age,

## /H17039 TABLE 1-3

| Routine Tests in Prenatal Care                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                              | Third Trimester                                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Hematocrit Blood type and screen RPR Rubella antibody screen Hepatitis B surface antigen Gonorrhea culture Chlamydia culture PPD Pap smear Urinalysis and culture VZV titer in patients with no history of exposure HIV offered | MSAFP/triple screen Ultrasound Amniocentesis in AMA patients | Hematocrit RPR GLT Repeat gonorrhea and chlamydia Chest x-ray if PPD + IP Group B strep culture |

an ultrasound is done to more accurately assess fetal growth. After  10  to  14  weeks, Doppler  ultrasound is  used  to  auscultate  the  fetal  heart  rate. Urine  is routinely  dipped  for  protein, glucose, blood, and leukocyte esterase. Protein may be indicative of  preeclampsia, glucose  of  diabetes, and  leukocyte esterase of urinary tract infection.

At each visit, the patient is asked about symptoms that indicate complications of  pregnancy. These symptoms include vaginal bleeding, vaginal discharge or  leaking  of  fluid, and urinary symptoms. In addition, after  20  weeks, patients  are  asked  about  contractions and fetal movement. Vaginal bleeding is a sign of miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy in the first trimester, and  of  placental  abruption  or  previa  as the pregnancy advances. Vaginal discharge may be a sign of infection or cervical change, whereas leaking fluid can indicate ruptured fetal membranes. While irregular  (Braxton-Hicks)  contractions  are  common throughout the third trimester, regular contractions more frequent than five or six per hour may be a sign of preterm labor and should be assessed. Changes in or absence of fetal movement should be evaluated by auscultation of the fetal heart in the previable fetus and with further testing such as a nonstress test or biophysical profile in the viable fetus.

## First-Trimester Visits

During the first trimester-patients, particularly nulliparous women-need to be familiarized with pregnancy. The  symptoms  of  pregnancy  and  what  will occur at each prenatal visit should be reviewed. At the second prenatal visit, all of the initial labs should

## /H17039 TABLE 1-4

| Initial Screens in Specific High-Risk Groups                                                       | Initial Screens in Specific High-Risk Groups                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| High-Risk Group                                                                                    | Specific Test                                                 |
| African American                                                                                   | Sickle-cell prep/Hgb electrophoresis                          |
| Age 35 or older at time of EDC                                                                     | Prenatal genetics referral                                    |
| Prior gestational diabetic, family history of diabetes, Hispanic, Native American, Southeast Asian | Glucose loading test                                          |
| Pregestational diabetic, unsure dates, recurrent miscarriages                                      | Dating sonogram                                               |
| Hypertension, renal disease, pregestational diabetic, prior preeclampsia, renal transplant, SLE    | 24 hour urine collection for protein and creatinine clearance |
| Pregestational diabetic, prior cardiac disease, hypertension                                       | Electrocardiogram (ECG)                                       |
| Pregestational diabetic                                                                            | Hgb A1C, ophthalmology for eye exam                           |
| Graves' disease                                                                                    | Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins                           |
| All thyroid disease                                                                                | TSH, possibly free T4                                         |
| Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)                                                                 | Anti-Rho, anti-La antibodies                                  |

be  reviewed  with  the  patient. Patients  with  poor weight gain or decreased caloric intake secondary to nausea and vomiting may be referred to a nutritionist. Patients treated for infections noted at the initial prenatal visit should be cultured for test of cure.

## Second-Trimester Visits

During the second trimester, much of the screening for genetic and congenital abnormalities is done. This allows  a  patient  to  obtain  an  elective  termination if  there  are  abnormalities. Screening  for maternal serum  alpha  fetoprotein (MSAFP)  is  usually  performed between 15 and 18 weeks. An elevation in MSAFP is correlated with an increased risk of neural tube  defects  and  a  decrease  is  seen  in  some  aneuploidies including Down syndrome.The sensitivity of aneuploidy screening is augmented using b -hCG and estriol  along  with  MSAFP  called  the triple  screen . Between 18 and 20 weeks gestation, most patients are offered a screening ultrasound. This provides the opportunity to do a thorough fetal anatomic survey. Also noted are the amniotic fluid volume, placental location, and gestational age.

The  fetal  heart  is  usually  first  heard  during  the second  trimester  and  the  first  fetal  movement, or 'quickening,' is felt late in the second trimester. Most patients have resolution of their nausea and vomiting by the second trimester, although some continue with  these  symptoms  throughout  their  pregnancy. Because the risk of spontaneous abortions decreases after  12  weeks  of  gestation, childbirth  classes  and tours  of  the  labor  floor  are  usually  offered  in  the second and third trimesters.

## Third-Trimester Visits

During the third trimester, the fetus is viable. Patients will begin to have occasional Braxton Hicks contractions and, if these contractions become regular, the cervix is examined to rule out preterm labor. Prenatal visits increase to every 2 to 3 weeks from 28 to 36 weeks and then to every week after 36 weeks. In addition, patients who are Rh negative should receive RhoGAM  at  28  weeks. Beyond  32  to  34  weeks Leopold's  maneuvers  (Figure  3-1)  are  performed to  determine  fetal  presentation. Beyond  37  weeks, which is  considered  term, the  cervix  is  usually  examined at each visit.

## Third-Trimester Labs

At  27  to  29  weeks, the  third-trimester  labs  are ordered. These consist of the hematocrit, RPR, and glucose loading test (GLT). At this time, the hematocrit  is  getting  close  to  its  nadir. Patients  with  a hematocrit below 32% to 33% (hemoglobin less than 11mg/dL) are usually started on iron supplementation. Because  this  will  cause  further  constipation, stool softeners are given in conjunction. The GLT is a screening test for gestational diabetes. It consists of giving a 50-g oral glucose loading dose and checking a serum glucose 1 hour later. If this value is greater than or equal to 140mg/dL, a glucose tolerance test (GTT) is administered.

•

The GTT consists of a fasting serum glucose measurement  and  then  administration  of  a  100-g  oral glucose loading dose. The serum glucose is then measured at 1, 2, and 3 hours after the oral dose is given. This  test is indicative of gestational diabetes  if the fasting glucose is over 105mg/dL or if any two of  three  values  are  over  190, 165, or  145mg/dL, respectively.

In high-risk populations, vaginal cultures for gonorrhea and chlamydia are repeated late in the third trimester. These infections are transmitted vertically during  birth  and  should  be  treated  if  cultures  or DNA tests return positive. At 36 weeks, many institutions perform screening for group B streptococcus. Patients  who  have  a  positive  culture  should  be treated with intravenous penicillin when they present in labor.

## KEY POINTS

1. The initial prenatal visit is used to screen for many of the problems that can occur in pregnancy and to verify dating of the pregnancy.
2. Much of the screening for genetic and congenital abnormalities is performed in the second trimester.
3. Blood pressure, weight gain, fundal height, fetal heart rate, and symptoms including contractions, vaginal bleeding, or discharge are assessed at each prenatal visit.

## /H17039 ROUTINE PROBLEMS OF PREGNANCY

## Back Pain

Low back pain in pregnancy is quite common, particularly  in  the  third  trimester  when  the  patient's center  of  gravity  has  shifted  and  there  is  increased strain on the lower back. Mild exercise-particularly stretching-may release endorphins and reduce the amount of back pain. Gentle massage, heating pads, and Tylenol can be used for mild pain. For patients with severe back pain, muscle relaxants or occasionally narcotics can be used.

## Constipation

The decreased bowel motility secondary to elevated progesterone levels leads to increased transit time in the large bowel. In turn, there is greater absorption of  water  from  the  gastrointestinal  tract. This  can result  in  constipation. Increased  PO  fluids, particularly  water, should  be  recommended. In  addition, stool softeners or bulking agents may help. Laxatives can  be  used, but  are  usually  avoided  in  the  third trimester because of the theoretical risk of preterm labor.

## Contractions

Occasional irregular contractions are considered Braxton  Hicks  contractions  and  will  occur  several times per day. Patients should be warned about these and  assured  that  they  are  perfectly  normal. Dehydration may cause increased contractions, and patients should be advised to drink many (10 to 14) glasses of water and juice per day. Regular contractions, as often as every 10 to 15 minutes, should be considered  a  sign  of  preterm  labor  and  should  be assessed by cervical examination. If a patient has had several days of contractions and no documented cervical change, this is reassuring to both the obstetrician and the patient that delivery is not imminent.

## Dehydration

Because  of  the  expanded  intravascular  space  and increased third spacing of fluid, patients have a difficult  time  maintaining  their  intravascular  volume status. Dietary recommendations  should  include increased  fluids. As  mentioned  above, dehydration may lead to uterine contractions, possibly secondary to cross-reaction of vasopressin with oxytocin receptors.

## Edema

Compression  of  the  inferior  vena  cava  (IVC)  and pelvic  veins  by  the  uterus  can  lead  to  increased hydrostatic  pressure  in  the  lower  extremities  and eventually to edema in the feet and ankles. Elevation of  the  lower  extremities  above  the  heart  can  ease this. Also, patients should be advised to sleep on their sides to decrease compression. Severe edema of the face and hands may be indicative of preeclampsia and merits further evaluation.

## Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

Relaxation  of  the  lower  esophageal  sphincter  and increased  transit  time  in  the  stomach  can  lead  to

reflux  and  nausea. Patients  with  reflux  should  be started  on  antacids, advised  to  eat  multiple  small meals per day, and avoid lying down within an hour of eating. For patients with continued symptoms, H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors can be given.

## Hemorrhoids

Patients  will  have  increased  venous  stasis  and  IVC compression, leading  to  congestion  in  the  venous system. Congestion  of  the  pelvic  vessels  combined with increased abdominal pressure with bowel movements  secondary  to  constipation  can  lead  to hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids  are  treated  symptomatically  with  topical  anesthetics  and  steroids  for pain  and  swelling. Prevention  of  constipation  with increased fluids, increased fiber in the diet, and stool softeners may prevent or decrease the exacerbation of hemorrhoids.

## Pica

Rarely, a  patient  will  have  cravings  for  nonedible items such as dirt or clay. As long as these substances are nontoxic, the patient is advised to maintain adequate nutrition and encouraged to stop ingesting the inedible items. However, if patients have been consuming toxic substances, immediate cessation along with a toxicology consult is advised.

## Round Ligament Pain

Usually late in the second trimester or early in the third trimester, there may be some pain in the adnexa or  lower  abdomen. This pain is likely secondary to the rapid expansion of the uterus and stretching of the ligamentous attachments, such as the round ligaments. This is often self-limited but may be relieved with Tylenol.

## Urinary Frequency

Increased  intravascular  volumes  and  elevated  glomerular  filtration  rate  (GFR)  can  lead  to  increased urine  production  during  pregnancy. However, the most likely cause of urinary frequency during pregnancy is that as the uterus grows, it increasingly compresses  the  bladder. A  urinary  tract  infection  may also be present with isolated urinary frequency but is  often  accompanied  by  dysuria. A  urinalysis  and culture should therefore be ordered to rule out infection. If no infection is present, patients can be assured that the increasing voiding is normal. Patients should be advised to keep up PO hydration despite urinary frequency.

## Varicose Veins

The lower extremities or the vulva may develop varicosities  during  pregnancy. The  relaxation  of  the venous  smooth  muscle  and  increased  intravascular pressure probably both contribute to the pathogenesis. Elevation of the lower extremities or the use of pressure stockings may help reduce existing varicosities  and  prevent  more  from  developing. If  the problem does not resolve by 6 months postpartum, patients may be referred for surgical therapy.

## KEY POINTS

1. Many of the routine problems of pregnancy are related to hormonal effects of the placenta.
2. It is important to discuss the side effects of pregnancy in order to best prepare the patient.
3. While pregnancy is often the cause of many somatic complaints, other causes should still be ruled out as in the nonpregnant patient.

## /H17039 PRENATAL ASSESSMENT OF THE FETUS

Throughout  pregnancy, the  fetus  is  screened  and diagnosed by a variety of modalities. Parents can be screened for common diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs, sickle-cell disease, and thalassemia. If both parents are carriers, the fetus is then diagnosed. Fetal karyotype  can  be  obtained  via  amniocentesis  or chorionic  villus  sampling  (CVS). The  fetus  can  be imaged and many of the congenital anomalies diagnosed  via  second  trimester  ultrasound. First  and second trimester genetic screening and prenatal diagnosis is discussed further in Chapter 3. Other fetal testing  includes  fetal  blood  sampling, fetal  lung maturity testing, and assessment of fetal well-being.

## Fetal Blood Sampling

Percutaneous  umbilical  blood  sampling (PUBS)  is performed by placing a needle transabdominally into the  uterus  and  phlebotomizing  the  umbilical  cord. This procedure may be used when the fetal hematocrit needs to be obtained, particularly in the setting

of Rh isoimmunization, other causes for fetal anemia, and hydrops. PUBS is also used for rapid karyotype analysis and to assess fetal platelet count in alloimmune thrombocytopenia.

## Fetal Lung Maturity

There are many tests for fetal lung maturity. Classically, the  lecithin  to  sphingomyelin  (L/S)  ratio  has been used as a predictor of fetal lung maturity. Type II  pneumocytes secrete a surfactant that uses phospholipids in its synthesis. Commonly, lecithin increases as the lungs mature, whereas sphingomyelin decreases  beyond  about  32  weeks. The  L/S  ratio should  therefore  increase  as  the  pregnancy  progresses. Repetitive  studies  have  shown  that  a  L/S ratio  of  greater  than  2  is  associated  with  only  rare cases of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). With a L/S ratio below 1.5, the risk of RDS is 70%. Examples of other fetal lung maturity tests include measuring  the  levels  of  phosphatidylglycerol, saturated phosphatidyl choline (SPC), the presence of lamellar bodies, and surfactant to albumin ratio (S/A).

## Ultrasound

Ultrasound can be used to date a pregnancy with an unknown or uncertain LMP, and is most accurate in the first trimester. In the setting of prenatal diagnosis  of  fetal  malformations, most  patients  undergo  a routine screening ultrasound at 18 to 20 weeks. Routinely, an attempt is made to identify placental location, amniotic fluid volume, gestational age, and any obvious malformations. In high-risk patients, careful attention is paid to commonly associated anomalies such as cardiac anomalies in pregestational diabetics. Fetal echocardiography and, rarely, MRI are used to augment  assessment  of  the  fetal  heart  and  brain, respectively.

In the third trimester, ultrasound can be used to monitor high-risk pregnancies by obtaining biophysical  profiles (BPP), fetal  growth, and  fetal  Doppler studies. The BPP looks at five categories and gives a score of either 0 or 2 for each: amniotic fluid volume, fetal tone, fetal activity, fetal breathing movements, and the nonstress test (NST), which is a test of the fetal heart rate. A BPP of 8 to 10 or better is reassuring. Ultrasound  can  also  be  used  to  assess  the blood flow velocity in the umbilical cord. A decrease, absence, or reversal of diastolic flow in the umbilical artery is progressively more worrisome.

## Antenatal Testing of Fetal Well-being

Formal antenatal testing includes the NST, the oxytocin challenge test (OCT), and the BPP. The NST is considered formally reactive if there are two accelerations of the fetal heart rate in 20 minutes that are at  least  15  beats  above  the  baseline  heart  rate  and last for at least 15 seconds. An OCT or contraction stress test (CST) is obtained by getting at least three contractions  in  10  minutes  and  analyzing  the  fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing during that time. The reactivity criteria are the same as for the NST. In addition, late  decelerations  with  at  least  half  of  the contractions constitute a positive test and is worrisome. Commonly, most  antenatal  testing  units  use the NST beginning at 32 to 34 weeks of gestation in high-risk  pregnancies  and  at  40.5  to  41  weeks  for undelivered patients. If the NST is nonreactive, the fetus  is  assessed  via  ultrasound. If  the  fetal  heart tracing has any worrisome decelerations or the BPP is not reassuring, an OCT is performed.

## KEY POINTS

1. Common screening tests for fetal abnormalities include MSAFP and the triple screen.
2. The fetus may be diagnosed with abnormalities using amniocentesis, CVS, and ultrasound.
3. Fetal status can be assessed antepartum with ultrasound, NST, BPP , and OCT.