## The Right to Safe Motherhood and Reproductive Health Act, 2075 (2018)

Date of Authentication

2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)

Act Number 9 of the year 2075 (2018)

## An Act Made to Provide for the Right to Safe Motherhood and Reproductive Health

Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary provisions on making motherhood and reproductive health service safe, qualitative, easily available and accessible, in order to respect, protect and fulfill the right to safe motherhood and reproductive health of the women conferred by the Constitution of Nepal,

Now, therefore be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

## Chapter-1

## Preliminary

1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Right to Safe Motherhood and Reproductive Health Act, 2075 (2018)."
- (2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act,-
4. (a) "Emergency obstetric care" means the service available twenty-four hours  to  manage  any  complications  in  case  such  complications appear  during  the  condition  of  pregnancy,  child  delivery  or  child birth.
5. (b) "Basic emergency obstetric care" means  the basic service such as administering antibiotic, magnesium sulfate or oxytocin, taking out entangled placenta and fetus membrane, give birth to infant with the help of vacuum and cleansing uterus in the case of occurrence of miscarriage.
6. (c) "Teenager" means a person who is of the age group of over ten years up to nineteen years.
7. (d) "Abortion" means the act of fetus coming out or taking it out of the womb or before the fetus remained in the uterus born naturally.

- (e) "Contraception"  means  the  measures  to  prevent  pregnancy  by creating  obstruction  in  the  common process  of  ovulation, melting over sperm and ovum or ovum implantation.
- (f) "Contraceptives" means hormone-based or other means to help in the work of contraception.
- (g) "Abortion  service"  means  the  abortion  service  performed  in  a licensed  health  institution,  by  the  licensed  health  worker  upon fulfilling the process under this Act.
- (h) "Obstetric care" means the service referred to in Section 5.
- (i) "Pregnancy" means  a period from the first day of the last menstruation occurred prior to conception up to remaining of fetus in the womb of a woman.
- (j) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the rules framed under this Act.
- (k) "Newborn  essential  care"  means  the  care  including  keeping  the newborn warm, caring of navel and eyes, breast feeding, administering necessary vaccines.
- (l) "Newborn emergency care" means administering antibiotic, managing including hypothermia for the newborn during the state of infection, and managing the problems  relating to respiration of such a new born.
- (m) "Family planning" means the plan to determine number of children or gap between pregnancies upon self interest by using or not using the contraceptives.
- (n) "Reproductive  health"  means  physical,  mental  and  social  health condition related to reproductive system, process and function.
- (o) "Right to reproductive health" means the right referred to in Section 3.
- (p) "Morbidity"  means  the  state  of  adversely  affecting  reproductive system due to reproduction, pregnancy, abortion, labor and sexual behavior, and this term also includes uterus prolapse, travail cavity, infertility,  pelvic  caner  and  similar  other  state  of  such  types  that affects reproductive system.

- (q) "Midwife" means a trained health worker to help in child birth of the pregnant woman.
- (r) "Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal looking after the matters relating to health.
- (s) "Comprehensive emergency obstetric care" means blood transmission  and  surgery  service,  in  addition  to  basic  emergency obstetric care mentioned in clause (b).
- (t) "Safe  motherhood"  means  motherhood  service  to  be  provided  to women pursuant to this Act during the state of pregnancy, labor and child birth.
- (u) "Health  institution"  means  a  hospital,  nursing  home,  medical college or health academy operated in governmental, nongovernmental,  community  or  private  level,  and  the  term  also includes  primary  health  center,  health  post  or  health  institution operated under any other name.

## Chapter-2

## Right to Reproductive Health

3. Right to reproductive health: (1) Every woman and teenager shall have the right to obtain education, information, counseling and service relating to sexual and reproductive health.

(2)  Every  person  shall  have  the  right  to  obtain  service,  counseling  and information relating to reproductive health.

(3) Every woman shall have the right to safe motherhood and reproductive health. Every woman shall have the right to determine the gap between births or the number of children.

(4)  Every  person  shall  have  the  right  to  get  information  regarding contraceptives and use them.

(5) Every woman shall have the right to obtain abortion service pursuant to this Act.

(6)  Every  woman  shall  have  the  right  to  nutritious,  balanced  diet  and physical rest during the condition of pregnancy and child birth and morbidity.

(7) Every woman shall have the right to get necessary counseling, obstetric care, and postpartum contraceptive service.

(8) Every woman shall have the right to get emergency obstetric care, basic emergency obstetric care, comprehensive emergency obstetric care, essential care for the new born baby and emergency care of the new born baby.

(9)  Every  person  shall  have  the  right  to  get  reproductive  health  service needed  during different situation of his/her lifecycle, in easily available, acceptable and safe manner.

(10)  Every  person shall have  the  right to  make  a  choice of  reproductive health service.

4. To  remain  confidential: The  reproductive  health  service  obtained  by  every person and information regarding this shall remain confidential.

## Chapter-3

## Safe Motherhood and Newborn Baby

5. Right to get obstetric service: (1) Every woman shall have the right to get her examined  or  checked  whether  she  is  pregnant  or  not,  upon  going  to  a  health institution.

(2)  The  health  institution  concerned  shall  have  to  provide  the  pregnant woman, coming to get service pursuant to sub-section (1),  with the services  as follows:

- (a) To check health at least four times during the pregnancy in normal condition,
- (b) To check health as per the advice of a physician or competent health worker  during  the  prescribed  condition  except  that  referred  to  in clause (a),
- (c) To receive appropriate counseling relating to health care,
- (d) To obtain safety measures and minimum care to be adopted during pregnancy.
6. To provide obstetric care: (1) A governmental and community health institution providing obstetric care shall have to arrange competent health worker to provide obstetric care, or midwife or other trained health worker if such a competent health worker is not available.

(2)  The  non-governmental  and  private  health  institution  fulfilling  the standard prescribed by the Government of Nepal shall have to provide  obstetric care in a respectful manner.

7. Emergency obstetric and newborn care: (1) The governmental and community health institutions providing obstetric care shall have to provide obstetric care in a respectful manner.

(2)  The  non-governmental  and  private  health  institutions  fulfilling  the standard prescribed by the Government of Nepal shall have to provide emergency obstetric and newborn care.

(3) In case the health institutions referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) are not able to manage the complications that arise while providing service by them, they shall have to refer to a governmental or community health institution to the extent possible and to a non-governmental and private institution if not possible.

(4) It  shall  be the duty of the health institution concerned to manage the health  complications  of  the  conditions  related  to  the  pregnant,  childbirth  or newborn who comes upon being referred pursuant to sub-section (3).

(5) The health institution providing emergency obstetric and newborn care shall have to make provision of resting place as prescribed for the pregnant women of the condition as prescribed.

8. Health care of newborn baby: The health institutions  providing obstetric care shall have to  make provisions relating to health care of the newborn baby as per the standard prescribed.
9. To maintain record of the births of infants: (1)  Each  health  institution  shall have to maintain record of the infants born in that health institution.

(2)  On  the  basis  of  the  record  referred  to  in  sub-section  (1),  the  health institution  shall  have  to  provide  the  father  or  mother  with  the  certificate  of  the infant born in its health institution by stating the name of father or mother of the infant.

(3)  Each  health  institution  shall  have  to  maintain  a  record  revealing  the number of the dead infants and the women who have undergone miscarriage or abortion.

(4) Each health institution shall have to maintain a record of dead women, if any, who come for the obstetric care.

10. Right to obtain family planning service: (1) Every person shall have the right to information, make choice relating to family planning, and get other services relating to family planning.

(2) The service relating to family planning as prescribed shall have to be obtained from the health institution as prescribed.

(3) Other matters relating to family planning shall be as prescribed.

11. Not to get family planning performed forcefully: It  is  forbidden to get family planning  of any one performed forcefully by coercing, or threatening or enticing or tempting or without obtaining written consent of such person.
12. Not to get contraceptives used forcefully: It is forbidden to get the contraceptives used by coercing any one, or threatening or enticing or tempting or without obtaining consent of such person.
13. Right  to  obstetric  leave: (1)  Any  woman  working  in  a  governmental,  nongovernmental  or  private  organization  or  institution  shall  have  the  right  to  get obstetric leave with pay, for a minimum of ninety-eight days before or after the delivery.

(2) In case the obstetric leave referred to in sub-section (1) is not sufficient to any pregnant woman, such a woman shall have the right to get leave without pay, for a maximum of one year upon the recommendation of the expert doctor.

(3) A governmental, non-governmental or private organization or institution shall have to make necessary arrangement for the woman working in its office for breast feeding during the office hours up to two years from the birth of the infant.

(4) Even if any pregnant woman gives birth to a dead infant or if the infant dies after birth, such a woman shall enjoy the leave referred to in sub-section (1).

(5)  If  the  wife  of  a  male  employee  working  in  a  governmental,  nongovernmental or private organization or institution is going to deliver a baby, such an employee shall get the obstetric care leave with remuneration for fifteen days before or after delivering the baby.

14. To provide additional leave: If complicated surgery is to be conducted as per the opinion  of  the  specialist  doctor  due  to  morbidity,  the  governmental,  nongovernmental  or  private  organization  or  institution  shall  have  to  provide  the woman working in its office with an additional leave with pay for a maximum of thirty days before or after conducting  such surgery.

## Chapter-4

## Safe Abortion

15. To perform safe abortion: A pregnant woman shall have the right to get safe abortion performed in any of the following circumstances:
2. (a) Fetus  (gestation)  up  to  twelve  weeks,  with  the  consent  of  the pregnant woman,
3. (b) Fetus  (gestation)  up  to  twenty-eight  weeks,  as  per  the  consent  of such woman, after the opinion of the licensed doctor that there may be danger upon the life of the pregnant woman or her physical or mental health may deteriorate or disabled infant may be born in case the abortion is not performed,
4. (c) Fetus (gestation) remained due to rape or incest, fetus (gestation) up to twenty-eight weeks with the consent of the pregnant woman,
5. (d) Fetus (gestation) up to twenty-eight weeks with the consent of the woman who is suffering from H.I.V. or other incurable disease of such nature,
6. (e) Fetus (gestation) up to twenty eight weeks with the consent of the woman,  as  per  the  opinion  of  the  health  worker  involved  in  the treatment  that  damage  may  occur  in  the  womb  due  to  defects occurred in the fetus (gestation), or that there is such defect in the fetus of the womb that it cannot live even after the birth, that there is condition of disability in the fetus (gestation) due to genetic defect or any other cause.
16. Not  to  get  abortion  conducted  forcefully: (1)  Except  in  the  circumstance  as referred to in Section 15, no one shall conduct or get abortion conducted with an intention to get the abortion conducted or knowingly or having reason to believe that the abortion can occur.

(2) No one shall get the abortion conducted by coercing a pregnant woman, threatening, enticing or tempting her.

(3) If any of the following acts is committed, it shall be deemed to have got abortion performed:

- (a) Getting abortion conducted pursuant to sub-section (2),
- (b) Miscarriage  that  occurs  while  something  is  done  to  the  pregnant woman with some enmity,

- (c) Making assistance to commit acts referred to in clauses (a) and (b),

(4) While conducting abortion, in case the abortion does not occur instantly but a living infant is born, and if the infant, which is born as a result of such an act dies immediately, it shall be deemed to have got the abortion conducted for the purposes of this Section.

17. Not to commit abortion upon identifying sex: (1) No one shall commit or cause to be committed an act to identify the sex of the fetus in the womb.

(2) A pregnant woman shall not be pressurized or compelled or intimidated or coerced or enticed or entrapped in undue influence  to identify the sex of the fetus.

(3) Conducting abortion or causing it to be conducted, by identifying the sex pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), is prohibited.

18. Safe  abortion  service: (1)  The  licensed  health  worker  who  has  fulfilled  the prescribed standards and qualification shall have to provide the pregnant woman with safe abortion service pursuant to Section 15 in the licensed health institution.

(2)  Appropriate technology and process of the service to be provided  as referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.

(3) The pregnant woman who wants to obtain the safe abortion service shall have to give consent in the prescribed format to the health institution which has obtained a license, or to the health worker who has obtained a license.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), in the case of a woman who is an insane, who is not in a condition to give consent instantly or who has not completed the age of eighteen years,  her guardian  or curator  shall have to give consent.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), in the case of a woman who is below the age of eighteen years, safe abortion service shall have to be provided by considering her best interests.

19. To maintain confidentiality: (1) The licensed health institution or licensed health worker shall have to keep confidential all records, information, documents related to reproductive health of the pregnant woman and counseling and service provided to her.

(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section  (1)  the  records relating  to  such  information,  document  and  counseling  service  may  be  made available on the following conditions:

- (a) If information is demanded by the investigation authority or court in course of investigation and hearing of any lawsuit,
- (b) If  it  is  required  to  quote  without  revealing  identity  of  the  related woman for the purpose of study, research or monitoring relating to safe abortion,
- (c) If the woman concerned demands herself the records thereof.

## Chapter-5

## Morbidity

20. Right to obtain morbidity care: (1) Every woman shall have the right to get her examined, obtain counseling and receive treatment relating to morbidity   by or in the health institution.

(2) It shall be the duty of the concerned health institution or health worker to  provide information of the matters relating  to the care to be followed  on the condition of morbidity and in the condition following the surgery, and the hazards likely to be caused by it while providing service referred to in sub-section (1) in a manner that such information is understandable.

21. Not to displace: No one shall divorce, expel from home or displace anyone or get any one divorced, expelled or displaced by showing the reason of morbidity.

## Chapter-6

## Budget Appropriation and Grant for Motherhood and Reproductive Health

22. To appropriate grant amount: (1) The Government of Nepal shall have to appropriate grant amount through its budget every year for every Local Level for the purpose of motherhood and reproductive health service.

(2)  The  Provincial  Government  shall have to appropriate  certain amount through its budget as grant every year, as per the Provincial law, for the Local Level for the purpose of motherhood and reproductive health service.

(3) The Local Level concerned shall have to spend the amount appropriated as per sub-sections (1) and (2) for the motherhood and reproductive health of the economically extremely destitute women as prescribed.

23. To  appropriate  budget  by  Local  Level: (1)  The  Local  Level  shall  have  to appropriate  necessary budget  from  its  annual  budget for the purposes  of motherhood and reproductive health service.

- (2)  While  appropriating  budget  as  referred  to  in  sub-section  (1),  it  shall have to be appropriated in such a way that governmental and community health institutions providing motherhood and reproductive health service receive it.
24. Reproductive Health Coordination Committee: (1) In order to make necessary suggestions to the Government of Nepal for preparing policies, plans and programs relating to safe  motherhood and reproductive health, there shall be one Reproductive Health Coordination Committee as follows:
3. (a) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Population -Chairperson
4. (b) Joint-secretary, Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens -Member
5. (c) Joint-Secretary, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology -Member
6. (d) Director General, Department of Health Services -Member
7. (e) Representative, Nepal Medical Council -Member
8. (f) Representative, Nepal Nursing Council -Member
9. (g) Representative, Nepal Health Professional Council -Member
10. (h) Legal Officer, Ministry of Health and Population -Member
11. (i) Two representatives including one woman nominated by the Ministry from among the professional institutions/persons conducting studies and research or extending service in the field of reproductive health and right to reproduction
12. -Member
13. (j) One representative of Nepal Health Volunteers Association designated by the Ministry -Member
14. (k) Director, Family Welfare Division, Health Service Department -Member-secretary
- (2)  The  Coordination  Committee  may  invite  the  expert  engaged  in  the sector of reproductive health and right to reproduction to the meeting as required.
- (3)  The  procedures  relating to the meeting  of  the Committee  shall be  as determined by the Committee itself.

## Chapter-7

## Offence and Punishment

25. Offence deemed to have been committed: If one commits any of the following acts, one shall be deemed to have been committed the offence under this Act:
2. (a) To deprive one of receiving the obstetric care referred to in Section 5,
3. (b) Refusal to provide obstetric care by any health institution providing obstetric care pursuant to Section 6,
4. (c) Referral  to  other  health  institution  deliberately  even  upon  the treatment being possible in his or her health institution, or,
5. (d) Non-issuance of birth certificate by the health institution pursuant to Section 9,
6. (e) Forceful conduction of family planning as referred to in Section 11,
7. (f) Making forceful use of contraceptive as referred to in Section 12,
8. (g) Conduction of abortion as referred to in Section 16,
9. (h) Commission of any act to identify sex of the fetus in contrary with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 17,
10. (i) Causing abortion upon identifying sex as referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 17,
11. (j) Breaching, or causing to be breached of, confidentiality in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 19,
12. (k) Making  or  causing  to  be  made  displacement  in  contrary  to  the provision of Section 21,
13. (l) Making discrimination contrary to the provision of Section 29.
26. Punishment: If one commits, or causes to be committed, any act that is deemed to be the offence as referred to in Section 25, one shall be liable to the following punishment according the gravity of the offence:
15. (a) Imprisonment  for  a  term  not  exceeding  six  months  or  fine  not exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the penalties for committing or getting committed the offence referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (l),
16. (b) Imprisonment for three months to six months and fine not exceeding fifty  thousand  rupees  for  committing  or  getting  committed  the offence referred to in clauses (e) and (f),

- (c) Punishment referred to in Section 188 of National Criminal Code, 2074 (2017) for committing or causing to be committed the offence referred to in clauses (g), (h) and (i),
- (d) Fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees for committing or causing to be committed the offence as referred to in clause (j),
- (e) Imprisonment  for  a  term  not  exceeding  one  year  and  fine  not exceeding  one  hundred  thousand  rupees  or  both  the  penalties  for committing or  causing to be committed the offence referred to in clause (k).
27. Provision of compensation: A person who is victimized from the offence under this Act shall be provided with reasonable compensation by the perpetrator.

## Chapter-8

## Miscellaneous

28. To  provide  disability  friendly  service: While  providing  services  including family planning, reproductive health, safe motherhood, safe abortion, emergency obstetric and newborn care, morbidity under this Act, such services shall have to be adolescent and disability friendly.
29. Not  to  discriminate: No  one  shall  discriminate  on  the  right  to  get  monthly services  including  family  planning,  reproductive  health,  safe  motherhood,  safe abortion, emergency obstetric and newborn care, morbidity on the ground of one's origin,  religion,  color,  caste,  ethnicity,  sex,  community,  occupation,  business, sexual and gender identity, physical or health condition, disability, marital status, pregnancy, ideology, state of being infected with or vulnerable to any disease or germ, state of morbidity, personal relationship or any other  similar ground.
30. Provision  of  protection  home: For  the  protection  of  reproductive  health  of  a woman who is mentally disabled, neglected from the house, family or relatives or raped, the Federal, Provincial and Local Levels shall have to make arrangement with reciprocal coordination for keeping such a woman in a protection home.
31. To  give  directives: (1)  The  Ministry  may  give  necessary  directives  to  health institutions to provide service of reproductive health.

(2) It shall be the duty of the concerned health institution to comply with the directives received pursuant to sub-section (1).

32. Service charge: (1) The governmental health institution or health institution that receives government grants shall have to provide free reproductive health service.

(2) Private, non-governmental and community health institutions may take service charge as prescribed for providing reproductive health service.

(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section  (2),  private,  nongovernmental and community health institutions and health workers shall have to make the service easily available, and provide free service (quota) as prescribed for the person who is unable to pay the service charge.

33. Obstetric  allowance: The  Government  of  Nepal  shall  have  to  provide  the extremely  destitute  woman  who  delivers  baby  with  obstetric  allowance  as prescribed.
34. Saving of act done in good faith: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,  no legal action shall be instituted against any health institution and health worker for any matter of the reproductive health service provided in good faith.
35. Authority to try cases : (1) The concerned District Court shall have the authority to originally adjudicate the cases of the offence under this Act.

(2) A person who is not satisfied with the punishment or order made by the District Court pursuant to sub-section (1) may make an appeal in the concerned High Court.

36. Government of Nepal to become plaintiff: (1) The Government of Nepal shall become the plaintiff in the cases referred to in Section 25.

(2)  The  cases  referred  to  in  Section  25  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been included in Schedule-1 of the National Criminal Procedure Code, 2074 (2017).

37. Limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months from the date of knowledge of the commission of any offence under this Act.
38. To be in accordance with prevailing law: The matters contained in this Act shall be  governed  by  this  Act  and  the  matters  not  contained  in  this  Act  shall  be  in accordance with the prevailing law.
39. Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in order to implement this Act.
40. To  issue  directives: The  Ministry  may  frame  and  implement  the  necessary directives subject to this Act and the rules framed under this Act.