## MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 (No. 53 of 1961) 1

[12 th . December, 1961]

An Act to regulate the employment of women in certain establishment for certain period before and after child-birth and to provide for maternity benefit and certain other benefits.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows: -

1. Short title, extend and commencement. -(1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
- (2) It extends to the whole of India 2 [* * *]
- (3) It shall come into force on such date as may be notified in this behalf in the Official Gazette, --
4. 3 [(a) in relation to mines and to any other establishment wherein persons are employed for  the  exhibition  of  equestrian,  acrobatic  and  other  performances,  by  the  Central Government, and]
5. (b) in relation to other establishments in s State, by the State Government.

NOTES. - This Act came into force in  relation  to  mines  in  the  territories  to  which  it extends  on  the  1 st .  November  1963  Vide S.O.  No.  2920,  dated  5 th .  October,  1963, published in the Gazette of India, Part II, Sec. 3 (ii), dated 12 th . October, 1963. This Act came into force in the whole of Uttar Pradesh with effect from 22 nd . February 1974, vide notification No. 512 (V)-2/36-5-13 (V) 72, dated 22 nd . February 1974.

2. Application of Act. -(1) It applies in the first instance, to every establishment being a factory, mine or plantation 4 [including any such establishment belonging to Government and  to every establishment wherein  persons  are employed  for  the  exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances]:

Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Central Government, after giving not less than two months' notice of its intention of so doing, by notification

1 Received the assent of the President on the 12 th . December, 1961 and published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 13 th . December 1961. For Statement of Objects and Reasons see Gazette of India , Extraordinary, Part II, dated 6 th . December 1960.

2 Words 'except the State of Jammu and Kashmir' omitted by Act 51 of 1970, Sec. 2 and Sch.

3 Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, Sec. 2, w.e.f. 1-3-1975 - Vide notification No. S.O. 113A (E), dated 27-2-1975.

4 Subs. by Aci 52 of 1973, S.3.

In the official on In the official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act  shall  apply  also  to  any  other  establishment  or  class  of  establishments,  industrial, commercial, agricultural or otherwise.

(2) 5 [Save as otherwise provided in 6 [sections 5A and 5B] nothing contained in this Act] shall  apply  to  any  factory  or  other  establishment  to  which  the  provisions  of  the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (84 of 1948), apply for the time being.

3. Definitions. -In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, --

- (a)  'appropriate Government' means in relation to an establishment being a mine 7 [or an  establishment  where  persons  are  employed  for  the  exhibition  of  equestrian, acrobatic and other performances], the Central Government and in relation to any other establishment, the State Government;
- (b) 'child' includes a still-born child;
- (c)  'delivery' means the birth of a child;
- (d) 'employer' means -
- (i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of the Government, a person  or  authority  appointed  by  the  Government  for  the  supervision  and control  of  employees  or  where  no  person  or  authority  is  so  appointed,  the head of the department;
- (ii) in relation to an establishment which is under any local authority, the person appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or where  no  person  is  so  appointed,  the  chief  executive  officer  of  the  local authority;
- (iii) in  any  other  case,  the  person  who  are  the  authority  which  has  the  ultimate control  over  the  affairs  of  the  establishment  and  where  the  said  affairs  are entrusted  to  any  other  person  whether  called  a  manager,  managing  director, managing agent, or by any other name, such person;

[ 8 (e) 'establishment' means -

- (i) a factory;
- (ii) a mine;
- (iii) a plantation;
- (iv) an establishment wherein persons are employed  for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatics and other performances; or

5 Subs. by Aci 21 of 1972, S.2.

6 Subs. by Act 53 of 1976, sec. 2, for 'section 5A'. Act 53 of 1976 came into force w.e.f. 1-5-1976 - Vide notification No. S.O. 337 (E), dated 30-4-1976.

7 Added by Act 52 of 1973, S. 4.

8 Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, S. 4.

- (v) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared under sub-section (4) of section 2 to be applicable;]
- (f)  'factory' means a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);
- (g) 'Inspector' means an Inspector appointed under section 14;
- (h) 'maternity benefit' means the payment refereed to in sub-section (1) of section 5;
- (i)  'mine' means a mine as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952)
- (j)  'miscarriage' means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at ay period prior to or during the twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage the causing of which ins punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
- (k) 'plantation'  means  a  plantation  as  defined  in  clause  (f)  of  section  2  of  the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);
- (l)  'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
- (m)   'State  Government'  in  relation  to  a  Union  territory,  means  the  Administrator thereof;
- (n) 'wages' means all remuneration paid or payable in cash to a woman, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled and includes -
- (1) such  cash  allowances  (including  dearness  allowance  and  house  rent allowance) as a woman is for the time being entitled to;
- (2) incentive bonus; and
- (3) the  money  value  of  the  concessional  supply  of  foodgrains  and  other articles,

but does not include -

- (i) any bonus other than incentive bonus;
- (ii) overtime earnings and any deduction or payment made on account of fines;
- (iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund or for the benefit of the woman under any law for the time being in force; and
- (iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of service;
- (o) 'woman' means a woman employed, whether directly or through any agency, for wages in any establishment.

NOTES. - Sec 3 (f). - A factory does not include a mine subject to the operation of the Mines Act, 152, or a railway running-shed.

Sec. 3 (j) - The definition of miscarriage is similar to the definition as given in Sec. 2 (14-B) of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948.

4.  Employment  of,  or  work  by,  women  prohibited  during  certain  period.  -(1)  No employer shall knowingly employ a woman in any establishment during the six weeks immediately following the day of her delivery or her miscarriage.

(2)  No  woman  shall  work  in  any  establishment  during  the  six  weeks  immediately following the day of her delivery of her miscarriage.

(3)  Without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  of  section  6,  no  pregnant  woman  shall,  on  a request being made by her in this behalf, be required by her employer to do during the period  specified  in  sub-section  (4)  any  work  which  is  of  an  arduous  nature  or  which involves  long  hours  of  standing  or  which  in  any  way  is  likely  to  interfere  with  her pregnancy or the normal development of the foetus, or is likely to cause her miscarriage or otherwise to adversely affect her health.

(4) The period referred to in sub-section (3) shall be -

- (a)  at the period of one month immediately preceding the period of six weeks, before the date of her expected delivery;
- (b) any period during the said period of six weeks for which the pregnant woman does not avail of leave of absence under section 6.

5.  Right  to  payment  of  maternity  benefit.  -(1)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  Act, every woman shall be entitled to, and her employer shall be liable for, the payment of maternity benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the period of her actual absence immediately  preceding  and  including  the  day  of  her  delivery  and  for  the  six  weeks immediately following that day.

Explanation. For  the  purpose  of  this  sub-section,  the  average  daily  wage  means  the average  of  the  woman's  wages  payable  to  her  for  the  days  on  which  she  has  worked during the period of three calendar months immediately preceding the date from which she absents herself on account of maternity, or one rupee a day, whichever is higher.

(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she has actually worked in an establishment of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit for a period of not less than one hundred and sixty days in the twelve months immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery:

Provided that the qualifying period of one hundred and sixty days aforesaid shall not apply to a woman who has immigrated into the State of Assam and was pregnant at the time of the immigration.

Explanation: For the purpose of calculating under this sub-section the days on which  a  woman  has  actually  worked  in  the  establishment,  the  days  for  which  she  has been laid-off during the period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery shall be taken into account.

(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit shall be twelve weeks, that is to say, six weeks up to and including the day of her delivery and six weeks immediately following that day:

Provided that where a woman dies during this period, the maternity benefit shall be payable only for the days up to and including the day of her death:

Provided further that where a woman, having been delivered of a child dies during her  delivery  or  during  the  period  of  six  weeks  immediately  following  the  date  of  her delivery,  leaving  behind  in  either  case  the  child,  the  employer  shall  be  liable  for  the maternity benefit for the entire period of six weeks immediately following the day of her delivery  but  if  the  child  also  dies  during  the  said  period,  then  for  the  days  up  to  and including the day of the death of the child.

NOTES. - The term 'week' means a cycle of seven days including Sundays; B. Shah V. Presiding Officer, A.I.R. 1978 S.  C.  12.

9 [5-A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. -Every woman entitled  to  the  payment  of  maternity  benefit  under  this  Act  shall,  notwithstanding  the application of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), to the factory or other  establishment  in  which  she  is  employed,  continue  to  be  so  entitled  until  she becomes qualified to claim maternity benefit under Sec. 50 of that Act.]

10 [5-B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. -Every woman -

- (a)  who is employed in a factory or other establishment to which the provisions of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), apply;
- (b) whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) for a month exceed the amount specified in sub-clause (b) of clause (a) of section 2 of that Act; and
- (c)  who  fulfils  the  conditions  specified  in  sub-section  (2)  of  section  5,  shall  be entitled to the payment of maternity benefit  under this Act].

6.  Notice  of  claim  for  maternity  benefit  and  payment  thereof.  -(1)  Any  woman employed in an establishment and entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act may give notice in writing in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer, stating  that  her  maternity  benefit  and  any  other  amount  to  which  she  may  be  entitled under this Act may be paid to her or to such person as she may nominate in the notice and that  she  will  not  work  in  any  establishment  during  the  period  for  which  she  receives maternity benefit.

(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall state the date from which she will be absent from work, not being a date earlier than six weeks from the date of her expected delivery.

9 Ins. By Act 21 of 1972, S. 3.

10 Ins. By Act 53 of 1976, S. 3.

(3)  Any  woman  who  has  not  given  the  notice  when  she  was  pregnant  may  give  such notice as soon as possible after the delivery.

(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such woman to absent herself from the establishment until the expiry of six weeks after the day of her delivery.

(5)  The  amount  of  maternity  benefit  for  the  period  preceding  the  date  of  her  expected delivery  shall  be  paid  in  advance  by  the  employer  to  the  woman  on  the  production  of such proof as may be prescribed that the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for the subsequent period shall be paid by the employer to the woman within forty-eight hours of production of such proof as may be prescribed that the woman has been delivered of a child.

(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not disentitle a woman to maternity benefit or any other amount under this Act if she is otherwise entitled to such benefit or amount  and  in  any  such  case  an  Inspector  may  either  of  his  own  motion  or  on  an application  made  to  him  by  the  woman,  order  the  payment  of  such  benefit  or  amount within such period as may be specified in the order.

NOTES. - See also Sec. 50 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, for conditions under which a woman becomes qualified to claim maternity benefit under this Act.

7. Payment or maternity benefit in case of death of a woman. -If a woman entitled to maternity  benefit  or  any  other  amount  under  this  Act,  dies  before  receiving  such maternity benefit or amount, or where the employer is liable for maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 5, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to the person nominated by the woman in the notice given under section 6 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative.

8.  Payment of medical bonus. -Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Act shall also be entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus of twenty-five rupees, if no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge.

9. Leave for miscarriage. -In case of miscarriage, a woman shall, on production of such proof  as  may  be  prescribed,  be  entitled  to  leave  with  wages  at  the  rate  of  maternity benefit for a period of six weeks immediately following the day of her miscarriage.

10.  Leave  for  illness  arising  out  of  pregnancy,  delivery,  premature  birth  of  child,  or miscarriage. -A woman suffering illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of child or miscarriage shall, on production of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled in addition to the period of absence allowed to her under section 6, or, as the case may  be,  under  section  9,  to  leave  with  wages  at  the  rate  of  maternity  benefit  for  a maximum period of one month.

11. Nursing breaks. -Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after such delivery shall, in addition to the interval for rest allowed to her, be allowed in the course of  her  daily  work  two  breaks  of  the  prescribed  duration  for  nursing  the  child  until  the child attains the age of fifteen months.

12. Dismissal during absence or pregnancy. -(1) Where a woman absents herself from work in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall be unlawful for her employer to  discharge  or  dismiss  her  during  or  on  account  of  such  absence  or  to  give  notice  of discharge or dismissal on such a day that the notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her service.

(2) (a) The discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time during her pregnancy, if the woman but for such discharge of dismissal would have  been entitled to maternity benefit or medical bonus referred to in section 8, shall not have the effect of depriving her of the maternity benefit or medical bonus:

Provided  that  where  the  dismissal  is  for  any  prescribed  gross  misconduct  the employer  may,  by  order  in  writing  communicated  to  the  woman,  deprive  her  of  the maternity benefit or medical bonus or both.

(b) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus or both may, within sixty days from the date on which the order of such deprivation is communicated to her, appeal to such authority as may be prescribed, and the decision of that authority on such appeal, whether the woman should or should not be deprived of maternity benefits or medical bonus or both, shall be final.

(c)  Nothing  contained  in  this  sub-section  shall  affect  the  provisions  contained  in  subsection (1).

13. No deduction of wages in certain cases. -No deduction from the normal and usual daily  wages  of  a  woman  entitled  to  maternity  benefit  under  the  provisions  of  this  Act shall be made by reason only of -

- (a)  the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of the provisions contained in subsection (3) of section 4 : or
- (b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under the provisions of section 11.

14. Appointment of Inspectors. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to by Inspectors for the purposes of  this  Act  and  may  define  the  local  limits  of  the  jurisdiction  within  which  they  shall exercise their function under this Act.

15. Powers and duties of Inspectors. -An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or conditions as may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the following powers, namely: -

- (a)  enter  at  all  reasonable  times  with  such  assistants,  if  any,  being  persons  in  the service of the Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises or place where women are employed or work is given to them in an

establishment,  for  the  purposes  or  examining  any  registers,  records  and  notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and require their production for inspection;

- (b) examine  any  person  whom  he  finds  in  any  premises  or  place  and  who,  he  has reasonable cause to believe, is employed in the establishment:

Provided  that  no  person  shall  be  compelled  under  this  section  to  answer  any question or give any evidence tending to incriminate himself:

- (c)  require  the  employer  to  give  information  regarding  the  names  and  addresses  of women employed, payments made to them, and applications or notices received form them under this Act; and
- (d) take copies of any registers and records or notices or any portions thereof.

16. Inspectors to be public servants. -Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be made. -(1) Any woman claiming that maternity  benefit  or  any  other  amount  to  which  she  is  entitled  under  this  Act  and  any person  claiming  that  payment  due  under  section  7  has  been  improperly  withheld,  may make a complaint to the inspector.

(2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receipt of a complaint referred to in subsection (1), make an enquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance with his orders.

(3)  Any  person  aggrieved  by  the  decision  of  the  Inspector  under  sub-section  (2)  may, within thirty days from the date on which such decision is communicated to such person, appeal to the prescribed authority.

(4)  The  decision  of  the  prescribed  authority  where  an  appeal  has  been  preferred  to  it under sub-section (3) or of the Inspector where no such appeal has been preferred, shall be final.

(5)  Any  amount payable under these sections shall be recoverable as an arrear of lane revenue.

18. Forfeiture of maternity benefit. -If a woman works in any establishment after she has been permitted by her employer to absent herself under the provisions of section 6 for any  period  during  such  authorized  absence,  he  shall  forfeit  her  claim  to  the  maternity benefit for such period.

19.  Abstracts  of  Act  and  rules  thereunder  to  be  exhibited.  -An  abstract  of  the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder in the language or languages of the locality  shall  be  exhibited  I  a  conspicuous  place  by  the  employer  in  every  part  of  the establishment in which women are employed.

20. Registers, etc. - Every employer shall prepare and maintain such registers, records and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed.

21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employers. -If any employer contravenes the provisions  of  this  Act  or  the  rules  made  thereunder  he  shall  be  punishable  with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and where the contravention is of any provision regarding maternity benefit or regarding payment of any other amount and such maternity benefit or  amount  has  not  already  been  recovered,  the  court  shall  in  addition  recover  such maternity benefit or amount as if it were a fine, and pay the same to the person entitled thereto.

22.  Penalty  for  obstructing  Inspector.  -Whoever fails  to  produce  on  demand  by  the Inspector any register or document in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder or conceals or prevents any person from appearing before or being examined by an Inspector, shall be punishable with imprisonment which ma extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.

23. Cognizance of offences. -(1) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder shall be instituted after the expiry of one year from the date  on  which  the  offence  is  alleged  to  have  been  committed  and  no  such  prosecution shall be instituted except by, or with the previous sanction of, the Inspector;

Provided  that  in  computing  the  period  of  one  year  aforesaid,  the  time,  if  any, taken for the purpose of obtaining such previous sanction shall be excluded.

(2) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any such offence.

NOTES. - Sections 21 to 23 deal with penalties under the Act and procedure to try offences committed under this Act.

24.  Protection  of  action  taken  in  good  faith.  -No  suit,  prosecution  or  other  legal proceeding  shall  lie  against  any  person  for  anything  which  is  in  good  faith  done  or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.

25. Power of Central Government to give directions. -The Central Government may give  such  directions  as  it  may  deem  necessary  to  a  State  Government  regarding  the carrying into execution the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions.

26.  Power to exempt establishments. -If  the  appropriate  Government is satisfied that having regard to an establishment or a class of establishments providing for the grant of benefit which are not less favourable than those provided in this Act, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be specified in the notifications, the establishment or class of establishments from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder.

27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. -(1) The provisions of this  Act  shall  have  effect  notwithstanding  anything  inconsistent  therewith  contained  in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the coming into force of this Act:

Provided  that  where  under  any  such  award,  agreement,  contract  of  service  or otherwise,  a  woman  is  entitled  to  benefits  in  respect  of  any  matter  which  are  more favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act, the woman shall  continue  to  be  entitled  to  the  more  favourable  benefits  in  respect  of  that  matter, notwithstanding that she is entitled to receive benefit in respect of other matters under this Act.

(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a woman  from entering into an agreement with her employer for granting her rights or privileges in respect of any matter, which are more favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act.

28.  Power  to  make  rules.  -(1)  The  appropriate  Government  may,  subject  to  the condition of previous publication and by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2)  In  particular,  and  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the  foregoing  power,  such rules may provide for -

- (a)  the preparation and maintenance of registers, records and muster rolls;
- (b) the  exercise  of  powers  (including  the  inspection  of  establishments)  and  the performance of duties by Inspectors for the purposes of this Act;
- (c)  the method of payment of maternity benefit and other benefits under this Act in so far as provision has not been made therefore in this Act;
- (d) the form of notices under section 6:
- (e)  the nature of proof required under the provisions of this Act;
- (f)  the duration of nursing breaks referred to in section 11;
- (g) acts which may constitute gross misconduct for purposes of section 12;
- (h) the authority to which an appeal under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 12 shall  lie,  the  form  and  manner  in  which  such  appeal  may  be  made  and  the procedure to be followed in disposal thereof;
- (i)  the  authority  to  which  an  appeal  shall  lie  against  the  decision  of  the  Inspector under section 17; the form and manner in which such appeal may be made and the procedure to be followed in disposal thereof;
- (j)  the  form  and  manner  in  which  complaints  be  made  to  Inspectors  under  subsection (1) of section 17 and the procedure to be followed by them when making inquiries or causing inquiries to be made under sub-section (2) of that section;
- (k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period  of  thirty  days  which  may  be  comprised  in  one  session 11 [or  in  two  or  more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session, aforesaid,]  both  Houses  agree  in  making  any modification in the rule or both houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

## 29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951. -In section 32 of Plantation Labour Act, 1951, --

- (a)  in sub-section (1), the letter and brackets '(a)' before the words 'in the case of sickness,'  the  word  'and'  after  the  words  'sickness  allowance',  and  clause  (b) shall be omitted.
- (b)  In sub-section (2), the words 'or maternity' shall be omitted.

## 30. Repeal. -On the application of this Act. -

(i) to mines, the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941 (19 of 1941); and Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 (Bom. Act VII of 1929), as in force in that territory, shall stand repealed.

11 Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, S. 5.