## I'm Pregnant!

WIC is here to support you, answer your questions, and provide you food and nutrition tips for a healthy pregnancy.

## Table of Contents . . .

## 4 Give Your Baby a Healthy Start

Why Is Being Active so Important?

- 6

## My Pregnancy Week-by-Week

Tips to Help Pregnancy Discomforts

## 10 Healthy Weight Gain

What Happens If I Gain Too Much Weight? Where Does All My Weight Go? Tips to Slow Down Weight Gain Tips to Gain More Weight

## 14 Eating Well

Eat Well to Feel Good Every Day Sample Meals for a Day Dish Up Tasty Recipes! Eat Fish-It's Good! How Can I Safely Eat Fish? Iron Is Important Foods to Limit or Avoid

## 29 Protecting You and Your Baby

Get Immunized Avoid Alcohol, Drugs and Smoking Get Dental Care

## 32 What About Breastfeeding?

<!-- image -->

'WIC has done more for me the first 5 years of my parenting journey than I could ever express. From helping me breastfeed and join mom groups where I've made awesome friends, to wiping my tears during my miscarriage, to finding resources to help Tucker's development, to carrying me through the chaos during my pregnancy with Forest, to filling my cupboards with food during the rough times. The women who work for WIC became my moms when my mom moved away.

'Thank you WIC for setting me up for success as a mom. It takes a village to raise a mother. Because of WIC, I'm patient as a mother and empowered as a woman. I feel blessed to have WIC. They've given me something to pay forward. WIC was not a hand out, it was a hand up and they set me up for success to be independent and thriving as a mother."

- Shasta County WIC

## Give Your Baby a Healthy Start

By taking care of yourself now, you are more likely to have a healthy baby and less likely to have problems during labor and delivery.

## Remember to:

- Go to all of your prenatal appointments.
- Follow the advice of your health care professional.
- Relax when you can.
- Get help from your friends and family as you prepare for your baby.
- Take your prenatal vitamin every day!
- Be active.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Why Is Being Active so Important?

Being active and exercising can help you feel energized and may make delivery easier. Exercise can help with body aches and pains now and will help you lose weight after delivery. Physical activity can also lower the risk of diabetes and high blood pressure during pregnancy.

Try walking, stretching, swimming, and playing with your children or pets. Ask your health care professional about exercise while pregnant.

<!-- image -->

## My Pregnancy Week-by-Week

Pregnancy is an exciting time-you and your baby will grow a lot in the next several months! This timeline gives you a little look at what may be happening during your pregnancy.

Every pregnancy is different. Talk to your WIC counselor or health care professional if you have questions.

## About Your Baby:

<!-- image -->

## At 4 weeks:

- The heart, brain and spinal cord forming

<!-- image -->

## At 8 weeks:

- All major organs and external body structures forming
- Heart beats regularly
- Arms, legs, fingers, toes growing, and eyes formed

<!-- image -->

## At 12 weeks:

- Baby can make a fist
- Baby is about 3 inches long and weighs almost 1 ounce

## My First Trimester

(Weeks 1-12)

The first weeks of pregnancy can be a whirlwind of emotions and changes in your body.

- Emotional-cry easier, more sensitive
- Constipation
- Feeling tired
- Morning sickness

## My Second Trimester

(Weeks 13-28)

## Many women have more energy in the 2nd trimester.

- Bigger appetite
- Less tired
- Less morning sickness
- Feel flutters of baby moving
- Belly begins to grow
- Some ankle swelling, leg cramps, and backaches

## About Your Baby:

<!-- image -->

## At 16 weeks:

- Baby makes sucking motions
- Baby is about 4 to 5 inches and weighs almost 3 ounces

<!-- image -->

## At 20 weeks:

- Baby is more active
- Eyebrows, eyelashes, fingernails, and toenails formed
- Baby can hear and swallow

<!-- image -->

## At 24 weeks:

- Hair begins to grow on baby's head
- Baby sleeps and wakes regularly
- Baby is about 12 inches long and weighs about 1 ½ pounds

## My Third Trimester

(Weeks 29-40)

## You get to meet your baby soon!

- Feel lots of baby movement
- Short of breath
- Heartburn
- Harder to sleep

## About Your Baby:

<!-- image -->

## At 32 weeks:

- Bones are all formed
- Baby kicks are forceful
- Eyes open and close
- Baby is gaining weight quickly
- Baby weighs about 4 to 4 ½ pounds

<!-- image -->

## At 36 weeks:

- Baby is getting bigger
- Baby is about 16 to 19 inches long and weighs about 6 to 6 ½ pounds

<!-- image -->

## At 37-40 weeks:

- Near your due date baby may turn into a head-down position for birth

## Tips to Help Pregnancy Discomforts

## Nausea

- Eat small, frequent meals.
- Try some plain crackers or dry cereal.
- Avoid greasy, fried foods.
- Eat high protein snacks throughout the day.
- Eat or sip sour/tart flavored fruits or juices.

## Heartburn

- Eat small, frequent meals.
- Wait about 30 minutes after eating before lying down.
- Avoid or limit spicy, greasy, acidic, and fried foods.
- Take a walk-being active may help.

## Constipation

- Choose foods higher in fiber.
- Drink plenty of water and fluids. Prune juice is very helpful.
- Be active every day.
- Eat regular meals and snacks.

## Healthy Weight Gain

Your baby depends on you to gain a healthy amount of weight during pregnancy. Gaining the right amount of weight will help your baby grow strong, can help you have a better delivery, and will make it easier for you to get back to your pre-pregnancy weight.

The amount of weight to gain is different for every pregnancy. Your pre-pregnancy weight, the number of babies you are having, and medical conditions may affect how much weight gain is recommended for you.

| Pre-Pregnancy Weight   | Recommended Weight Gain   |
|------------------------|---------------------------|
| Underweight            | 28-40 pounds              |
| Normal weight          | 25-35 pounds              |
| Overweight             | 15-25 pounds              |
| Obese                  | 11-20 pounds              |

Weight gain is often slow at first-you may only gain one to five pounds in the first three months of pregnancy. You may expect to gain one pound per week in the last six months of pregnancy until your baby comes.

<!-- image -->

## What Happens If I Gain Too Much Weight?

Gaining too much weight during your pregnancy could lead to: high blood pressure, diabetes, early delivery (premature baby), a very large baby, the need for a C-section, and extra weight to lose after delivery.

<!-- image -->

## Where Does All My Weight Go?

In addition to your growing belly, you may have noticed the rest of your body changing. Weight gained during pregnancy is not just the baby. You will have changes all over your body to help your growing baby.

Blood:

4 pounds

Body Fluids:

4 pounds

## Mother's Extra Muscle and

Fat Stores:

7 pounds

Breasts:

2 pounds

Baby:

7 ½ pounds

Placenta:

1 ½ pounds

Uterus:

2 pounds

Amniotic Fluid:

2 pounds

## Tips to Slow Down Weight Gain:

- Eat more fresh fruits and vegetables.
- Eat less of the 'extras' such as added sugars and solid fats in foods like sodas, desserts, fried foods, whole milk, and fatty meats.
- Eat slowly and take time to enjoy your food. Turn off the television.
- Talk to your health care professional about increasing physical activity. For most women, physical activity can be continued throughout pregnancy.

## Tips to Gain More Weight:

- Eat 2 or 3 healthy snacks between meals.
- Add nutrient- and calorie-rich foods such as avocado, nuts, dried fruit, and peanut butter to snacks and meals.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Eating Well

<!-- image -->

Eating a variety of foods is important for giving your baby the best possible start and for helping you feel your best.

Many women think they need to eat a lot more food because they are eating for two.

This is not true! Simply include a variety of foods in your diet, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, protein, and dairy.

Eat Well to Feel Good Every Day!

<!-- image -->

## 2 to 3 or more of these choices:

- 1 cup fresh vegetables
- 1 cup frozen or canned vegetables
- 2 cups raw or leafy vegetables

Choose a variety of colorful vegetables. Make sure to include dark green, red, and orange choices such as carrots, broccoli, spinach, red and green bell peppers, kale, sweet potato, or squash.

<!-- image -->

## 2 of these choices:

- 1 cup fresh fruits
- 1 cup unsweetened frozen or canned fruits

Focus on whole fruits. Eat a fruit with vitamin C every day, such as oranges, strawberries, melons, mangos, papayas.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Grains, Breads, and Cereals

## 6 to 8 of these choices:

- 1 slice bread
- 1 small tortilla
- 1 cup ready-to-eat cereal
- 4 crackers
- ½ cup cooked cereal, noodles, rice

Look for whole grain cereals fortified with iron and folic acid. Choose mostly

<!-- image -->

whole grain foods, such as whole wheat bread, whole grain crackers, brown rice, steel cut oats, whole grain pasta, and whole wheat or corn tortillas.

<!-- image -->

## Protein Foods

## 6 to 7 of these choices:

## Animal Protein

- 1 ounce lean meat, chicken, turkey, fish
- 1 egg

<!-- image -->

## Vegetable Protein

- ¼ cup cooked dry beans, peas, lentils
- 1 tablespoon peanut butter
- ¼ cup tofu
- ½ ounce nuts or seeds

Vary your protein routine to include lots of different protein-rich foods.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Dairy Products

## 3 to 4 of these choices (4 for teens):

- 1 cup milk
- 1 cup yogurt
- 1 ½ ounces cheese
- 2 cups cottage cheese

Choose mostly nonfat or low fat milk products. These are rich in the mineral calcium.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Drink beverages and eat foods with less caffeine and added sugars, sodium, and saturated fats.

<!-- image -->

Remember to include physical activity!

<!-- image -->

## Sample Meals for a Day

Here is a sample menu to give you some ideas. Find your healthy eating style by planning your own menu.

## Sample menu:

## Cold cereal

1 cup ready-to-eat whole grain cereal

1 cup milk

1 slice whole wheat toast

1 tablespoon peanut butter

1 small banana

Water

1 whole wheat tortilla

1 ½ ounces cheese

Water

## My menu:

<!-- image -->

Snack

<!-- image -->

Snack

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Sample menu:

Mid-Day

## Tuna or pink salmon sandwich

2 slices whole wheat bread

2 ounces chunk light tuna or canned pink salmon

1 tablespoon chopped celery

1 tablespoon mayonnaise

½ cup shredded lettuce

- 1 medium orange or other seasonal fruit

- 1 cup milk

Snack

1 hard-boiled egg

6 whole grain crackers

1 cup vegetable sticks

Water

## My menu:

Mid-Day

Snack

<!-- image -->

Dish Up Tasty Recipes!

21

## Yummy Green Smoothie

## Ingredients

- 1 cup kale or spinach
- 1 banana, medium
- 1 cup low fat milk, or soy milk
- 1 cup plain yogurt
- 1 apple, medium (cored and sliced)

## Preparation

1.  In a blender, blend the kale or spinach and the liquid of your choice.
2.  Add in the rest of the ingredients, blending after each item.
3.  Serve and enjoy cold.
4.  Reserve the leftover smoothie in the refrigerator for later in the day or the next day. Drink within 24 hours.
5. 1 cup frozen fruit
6. 1 tablespoon flax seeds, (optional)
7. 1 tablespoon olive oil
8. 1 tablespoon chia seeds, (optional)

Source: Adapted from What's

Cooking? USDA Mixing Bowl

<!-- image -->

Serves:

2-3

## Avocado, Rice and Beans

## Ingredients

- 2 cans low sodium beans, rinsed and drained*
- 1 cup brown rice
- 2 avocados

## Preparation

1.  Bring 2 cups of water to a boil with ½ teaspoon salt (optional). Stir in rice. Cover and cook over low heat until water is absorbed, about 45 minutes, or cook rice in a rice cooker.
2.  Heat beans over low heat in a small saucepan, or in the microwave. Add black pepper, ground cumin or other spices as desired.
3.  Cut avocados into slices or dice into small pieces.
4.  Serve rice with beans on top, and garnish with avocado pieces.
5.  *Substitute 3 ½ cups cooked dry beans, if desired.

Source: Eatfresh.org, original recipe from Leah's Pantry

Serves:

4

Time:

50 minutes

High In Fiber

<!-- image -->

## Rosemary Lemon Chicken with Vegetables

## Ingredients

- ½ pound small red potatoes, cubed
- 1 ½ cups baby carrots
- 1 cup green beans, trimmed
- 2 boneless, skinless chicken breasts halved
- 1 tablespoon olive oil
- ¼ cup lemon juice
- 2 tablespoons honey
- 1 tablespoon fresh rosemary, chopped (or 1 teaspoon dried rosemary)
- 1 teaspoon grated lemon peel
- ¼ teaspoon ground black pepper

<!-- image -->

Serves:

4

Time:

35 minutes

## Preparation

1.  In a medium pot, bring 8 cups of water to a boil.
2.  Add potatoes, carrots, and green beans and cook just until potatoes are tender, or about 5 minutes. Drain and set aside.
3.  Cut chicken breasts in half. Place olive oil and chicken breasts in a medium skillet; cook over medium heat for 5 minutes on each side.
4.  Add potatoes, carrots, green beans, and all remaining ingredients to skillet.
5.  Cook over low heat for 5 minutes more or until chicken is fully cooked. Serve.

## Eat Fish-It's Good!

Fish are nutritious and most are very safe to eat.

- Fish have protein and healthy fats, called omega-3s, which are not found in other meats.

## Shrimp and Bok Choy

## Ingredients

- 3 tablespoons vegetable oil
- 2 teaspoons crushed red pepper flakes (optional)
- 4 cloves garlic, chopped
- 2 inches ginger root, peeled and grated
- ½ pound brown mushrooms, sliced
- 1 bok choy, trimmed and cut into 3' pieces

## Preparation

1.  In stockpot, heat oil, crushed red pepper, garlic, ginger, mushrooms, and bok choy.
2.  Add chicken broth and clam juice or water. Cover and bring soup to boil.
3.  Add shrimp and a vermicelli: cook 3 minutes.
4.  Serve sprinkled with green onions.

Source: Eatfresh.org, original recipe from UC Cooperative Extension Fresno

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- Some fish may contain the chemical mercury. Too much mercury in your diet can be harmful. It's best to eat fish that are lower in mercury.
- 1 quart low sodium chicken broth
- 1 cup clam juice or water
- 1 pound medium shrimp, peeled and deveined (or substitute with cubed tofu or chicken)
- 8 ounces vermicelli (thin spaghetti)
- 4 green onions cut into 3' pieces, shredded, lengthwise into thin strips

Serves:

4

Time:

20 minutes

<!-- image -->

## How Can I Safely Eat Fish?

- Enjoy fish 2 to 3 times a week, about 8 to 12 ounces total. Choose lower mercury fish such as catfish, cod, chunk light tuna (canned), mackerel (not king mackerel), salmon, sardines, shrimp, tilapia, trout.
- Limit Albacore 'white' tuna to 6 ounces or less a week. Albacore has more mercury than chunk light tuna.

Avoid shark, swordfish, tilefish, or king mackerel. These are highest in mercury and could be harmful to your baby.

## Iron Is Important

Everyone needs iron for healthy blood. Low iron in your blood can make you feel tired, weak, and get sick easily.

## Some sources of iron include:

- Meats: liver, beef, turkey, chicken, fish, and pork
- Enriched cereals
- Beans, dried peas
- Prune juice
- Eggs

<!-- image -->

Eat 2 to 3 foods high in iron every day. Be sure to take your prenatal vitamin and any additional iron pills recommended by your health care professional.

<!-- image -->

## Foods to Limit or Avoid!

Pregnant women should limit or avoid some foods because they may contain harmful germs:

- Do not drink raw or unpasteurized milk, cheese or juice. This includes homemade queso blanco, queso fresco, and panela.
- Do not eat raw or undercooked meat, eggs, and fish. This includes sushi and meat spreads like patés.
- Always heat hot dogs and luncheon meats until steaming hot.

## RAW MILK

Whole Unpasteurized Milk

## GOVERNMENTWARNING!

Raw (unpasteurized milk may contain diseasecausing microorganisms.Persons at highest risk of disease from these organisms include newborns and infants, the elderly, pregnant women, those taking corticosteroids, antibiotics and antacids, and those having chronic illnesses or other conditions that weaken their immunity.

Half Gallon (1.89L)

Sell By:AUG16

## Protecting You and Your Baby

## Get Immunized

Did you know? Getting immunized while you are pregnant is safe and helps protect your baby!

## Make sure you get a:

- Flu shot by late October. If you missed it, get it now!
- Whooping cough shot (Tdap) as early as possible in the 3rd trimester of every pregnancy.

Flu and whooping cough can be very dangerous for your baby. Get immunized at your doctor's office or call your health plan's member services to find a pharmacy or other place to go.

## Avoid Alcohol, Drugs and Smoking

When you are pregnant, drinking any amount of alcohol is not safe. Drinking alcohol can harm your baby's brain and cause long-term learning problems.

Taking any street drug, or prescription medicines that are not yours, can be harmful to you and your baby. Be sure to let your health care professional know as soon as you think you are pregnant.

Avoid using tobacco products, such as cigarettes and e-cigarettes. Also, avoid breathing secondhand smoke or e-cigarette aerosol (vapor). Cigarette smoke is harmful and may lead to health problems including premature birth and birth defects. The best choice is to quit tobacco use. If you need help quitting, talk to your health care professional or WIC counselor.

There is no known safe amount of marijuana to use during pregnancy. Breathing marijuana smoke is bad for you and your baby. Marijuana that passes to your baby during pregnancy may cause low birth weight and health problems, especially during your baby's first year of life.

<!-- image -->

## Get Dental Care

Taking care of your mouth while you are pregnant is important for you and your baby. Gum disease can cause a premature or small baby. Brushing and getting dental checkups and treatment will help keep you and your baby healthy.

## While you are pregnant:

- Brush your teeth with a soft toothbrush and toothpaste with fluoride twice a day.
- Get a dental checkup. It is safe to have dental care when you are pregnant.
- Let the staff know you are pregnant and your due date.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## What About Breastfeeding?

This is a great time to start thinking about how you want to feed your baby. Ask a friend or relative who has breastfed about her experience. What did she find challenging? What did she like?

## WIC encourages breastfeeding.

We provide support and information during your pregnancy and after your baby is born. WIC support comes in many forms and varies by location. Services may include:

- Individual and group breastfeeding classes
- Breast pumps
- Support groups
- Breastfeeding peer counselors
- Referrals to breastfeeding experts

Your WIC counselor is happy to answer your questions. There are so many reasons to breastfeed and WIC is here for you.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

California Department of Public Health, California WIC Program

This institution is an equal opportunity provider.

<!-- image -->