<!-- image -->

## Healthy pregnancy handbook

<!-- image -->

## Congratulations on your pregnancy!

At University Hospitals MacDonald Women's Hospital, we know nothing is more important than your healthy pregnancy and baby's arrival. You can trust our expert team to care for you during this special and exciting time in your life.

UH MacDonald Women's Hospital is recognized nationally for its expert staff and high level of care for women and newborns. While your care team guides you through a safe pregnancy and birth, you can be assured that you and your little one will receive the most comprehensive, personalized and compassionate care possible.

We are also a leader in the support and management of all types of pregnancies and births, whether normal or high risk. Babies and their moms benefit from a dedicated, multidisciplinary obstetrics team led by nationally recognized obstetricians, gynecologists, maternal fetal medicine specialists, certified nurse-midwives, nurse practitioners, researchers and other experts in women's health.

Furthermore, we are the only hospital in the region that can provide the highest level of care for both high-risk mothers and infants all in the same facility. Rest assured that, should your baby require additional care, UH Rainbow Babies &amp; Children's Hospital ranked one of the nation's best in neonatal care - is just a few steps away.

In this packet, you will find helpful information on what to expect during pregnancy and how to keep you and your baby healthy. You will also find links to access online resources. We encourage you to discuss all questions and concerns with your obstetrician or nurse-midwife.

Thank you for choosing us as your trusted health care provider. It is our privilege to care for you and your family as you journey toward a memorable and happy birth experience.

Sincerely,

The UH MacDonald Women's Hospital staff

<!-- image -->

## Plan ahead with prenatal care

Proper prenatal care helps prevent and treat any issues that develop during pregnancy. In fact, it is the best thing you can do for your health - and your baby's. Women who get prenatal care are healthier and have fewer problems with their pregnancies, labor, birth and recovery. Here are a few tips to get the most from your prenatal care:

- n Keep your doctor or nurse-midwife in the loop: As soon as your pregnancy test turns up positive, call for your first prenatal visit. During this appointment, your doctor or nurse-midwife will give you a physical exam and ask about your health history. You will also learn about the benefits of breastfeeding for you and your baby. And he or she can answer any questions you have about what to expect in the months ahead.
- n Stay up-to-date on tests: At each visit, your doctor or nurse-midwife will weigh you, check your blood pressure and take samples of your blood and urine. Blood tests check for viruses, high blood glucose and anemia. Urine tests spot kidney problems, urinary tract infections or early signs of gestational diabetes. In some cases, your doctor or nursemidwife may recommend special tests to monitor your baby's heart rate or assess the risk of birth defects. At about 18 to 20 weeks, you will get an ultrasound, which uses sound waves to create an image of your baby.
- n Stick to your schedule: Discuss how often to return for check-ups. Typically, you will go once a month for the first 28 weeks, every two weeks from 28 to 36 weeks and weekly from week 36 on. If you have a health condition or are older than 35, you may need more frequent visits. Do not skip a visit, even when you feel fine.

<!-- image -->

## What to expect: An overview of prenatal tests

Here is a rundown of some of the tests or screenings you may undergo at each doctor visit.

| Test                                                               | When                                                                            | Purpose                                                                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Blood work and pelvic exam                                         | First prenatal visit (six to 10 weeks)                                          | Check for anemia, blood type and sickle cell trait and perform recommended tests and optional test for the cystic fibrosis gene. |
| Optional genetic screening with blood testing and early ultrasound | Nine to 14 weeks; may require follow-up tests that can be done through 21 weeks | Optional screening tests for genetic conditions of the fetus, such as Down syndrome.                                             |
| Anatomy ultrasound                                                 | 18 to 22 weeks                                                                  | Evaluation of baby's major organs and the placenta. Will also probably be able to determine the baby's sex.                      |
| Diabetes screening (one-hour glucose test) and blood counts        | 25 to 28 weeks                                                                  | Screening for diabetes and anemia in pregnancy.                                                                                  |
| Blood type and rhogam                                              | 28 weeks                                                                        | Prevents problems when the baby's blood type is not the same as the mother's blood type.                                         |
| Group B strep culture                                              | 35 to 37 weeks                                                                  | Identifies women who carry bacteria that can cause the baby to get an infection during birth.                                    |

## Sign up today!

Track your baby's development and get expert tips and advice by subscribing to our weekly email for new and expectant parents. To sign up, text UHHS to 617-580-3050 or visit UHhospitals.org/GrowKids .

## Pregnancy changes: Your body, your baby

## First trimester

Your body: The first trimester of pregnancy is a time of rapid change for you and the baby. Hormones rise with the developing fetus and placenta, causing common symptoms like nausea, fatigue and breast tenderness. Now is an important time to make healthy lifestyle choices, such as quitting smoking, avoiding alcohol and eating a healthy diet. Your baby: After around 10 to 12 weeks, you will be able to hear your baby's heartbeat at your appointments.

## Get ready for baby's arrival

We offer a series of childbirth education programs and services designed to help expectant parents achieve a memorable birthing experience. For details, please refer to the enclosed Childbirth and Parenting Education brochure or visit UHhospitals.org/BirthClass .

## Second trimester

Your body: The second trimester, enjoyable time of pregnancy.

weeks 14 to 27, is often the most The symptoms of the first trimester are over, but the baby is still a smaller size and you are still comfortable.

Your baby: During this time, the baby continues to grow and develop, and all the major organs have formed. Most moms-to-be begin to feel the baby move between 16 and 22 weeks (20 and 22 weeks if you have never had a baby).

## Third trimester

Your body: The third trimester of pregnancy may be physically more difficult due to the baby's increasing size. Near the end of your pregnancy, your doctor or nurse-midwife may perform vaginal exams to determine your baby's position, and check your cervix for dilation.

Your baby: The baby is finishing development and gaining weight. Toward the end of pregnancy, you may be asked to do 'kick counts' and track the baby's movement daily.

<!-- image -->

## Eight ways to survive stress in pregnancy

Joy, worry, excitement, concern - pregnancy can be an emotional roller coaster. These strategies can help smooth out the highs and lows of this nine-month ride.

- n Eat well and get enough sleep.
- n Engage in exercise, which can improve sleep and relieve stress.
- n Share concerns with friends and family members who are parents.
- n Take a childbirth class.
- n Learn about basic childcare, such as how to change a diaper.
- n Talk with your doctor or nurse-midwife about developing a plan for labor and delivery and your partner's role in the birth.
- n Plan arrangements for day care, time off work and who is in charge of what after the baby is born.
- n Take time to do things together as a couple, and enjoy these months as you prepare for parenthood.

For more tips on dealing with stress and other pregnancy-related topics, visit UHhospitals.org/HealthyPregnancy .

## Top pregnancy

FAQs

## Can I travel?

Yes. In the absence of pregnancy complications, travel is safe during pregnancy. Most commercial airlines allow pregnant women up to 36 weeks to fly.

## Can I change my cat's litter box?

No. Cats carry a parasite that is passed in their feces called toxoplasmosis, which can cause miscarriage and infections in your baby. If you have a cat, have someone else change the litter box. If there is no one else to change the litter box, wear gloves and wash your hands thoroughly.

## Safe over-the-counter medications during pregnancy

| Pain            | Tylenol or Acetaminophen                                                    | Tylenol or Acetaminophen                                                    |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Allergies       | Benadryl Claritin Zyrtec                                                    | Benadryl Claritin Zyrtec                                                    |
| Cough           | Robitussin                                                                  | Robitussin                                                                  |
| Sore throat     | Chloraseptic spray Throat lozenges                                          | Chloraseptic spray Throat lozenges                                          |
| Heartburn       | Tums Mylanta Pepcid                                                         | Rolaids Maalox Zantac                                                       |
| Constipation    | Miralax Fiber laxatives like Metamucil or Benefiber Milk of Magnesia Colace | Miralax Fiber laxatives like Metamucil or Benefiber Milk of Magnesia Colace |
| Diarrhea        | Imodium AD Kaopectate                                                       | Imodium AD Kaopectate                                                       |
| Hemorrhoids     | Anusol with hydrocortisone Preparation H with hydrocortisone Tucks          | Anusol with hydrocortisone Preparation H with hydrocortisone Tucks          |
| Nausea          | Benadryl Doxylamine Dramamine Vitamin B6 (25mg tablet)                      | Benadryl Doxylamine Dramamine Vitamin B6 (25mg tablet)                      |
| Yeast infection | Monistat                                                                    | Gyne-Lotrimin                                                               |

## Can I exercise?

Yes. In the absence of medical or pregnancy complications, 30 minutes or more of moderate exercise on most days of the week is recommended. Avoid activities with a high risk of falling or hitting your abdomen.

<!-- image -->

## Eating for two

Your diet during pregnancy is important. A variety of healthy foods from all the food groups is needed each day. The healthiest diet has most calories coming from fruit and vegetables, lean meats and beans, low-fat dairy products and whole grains. These nutrient-rich foods will help keep you healthy and your baby growing properly right from the start. Soft drinks, fried foods, whole milk and fruit juice should be limited. These items may cause too much weight gain in pregnancy.

TIP: Most women should also take a prenatal vitamin, which contains the extra iron and folic acid needed during pregnancy. Folic acid is a B vitamin that can reduce the risk for some birth defects. Iron is a mineral that pregnant women need to help produce extra blood.

## Plan your pregnancy diet

The U.S. Department of Agriculture has a website for pregnant and breastfeeding women to help plan a diet. Visit ChooseMyPlate.gov/Pregnancy-Breastfeeding.html .

<!-- image -->

## Four foods to approach with caution

## Pregnancy weight gain: What is healthy?

Just like maternity clothes, weight gain during pregnancy is not one-size-fits-all. At your first prenatal visit, ask about how much weight you should gain. The amount depends on your starting body mass index (BMI), an assessment based on height and weight. Experts recommend eating about 300 extra calories per day while pregnant.

Excess weight gain during pregnancy can cause complications, such as a large baby, elevated risk for gestational diabetes and increased chance for cesarean section. To help prevent too much weight gain during your pregnancy, limit your intake of low nutrient foods - such as soft drinks, chips and candy - watch food portion sizes and stay active.

## Guidelines for healthy weight gain during pregnancy

| Prepregnancy BMI category   | Body mass index (BMI) range   | Recommended total weight gain   |
|-----------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Normal weight               | 18.5 - 24.9                   | 25 - 35 lbs.                    |
| Underweight                 | Less than 18.5                | 28 - 40 lbs.                    |
| Overweight                  | 25.0 - 29.9                   | 15 - 25 lbs.                    |
| Obese                       | Greater than or equal to 30   | 11 - 20 lbs. or less            |

Adapted from: Institute of Medicine, Weight Gain During Pregnancy, Re-examining the Guidelines, 2009

<!-- image -->

1 Fish. At least 12 ounces of fish per week is safe and good for the baby's developing brain and eyesight. But avoid fish that are very high in mercury, such as shark, tilefish, king mackerel and swordfish, and limit tuna.

<!-- image -->

2 Deli meats. In rare cases, deli meats can be contaminated with bacteria, called listeria. Listeriosis can cause miscarriage, premature delivery and serious health problems for the newborn. If you want to avoid this rare but serious occurrence, reheat deli meats and hot dogs until they are steaming hot to kill any bacteria.

3 Cheese. It is safe to eat hard cheeses, semi-soft cheeses, cream cheese and cottage cheese. Avoid soft cheeses such as feta, brie, blue-veined cheeses or queso fresco unless they have labels that clearly state they are made from pasteurized milk.

4 Coffee, soda and energy drinks. Consuming less than 200 milligrams of caffeine per day is safe in pregnancy. This is the amount of caffeine in one to two cups of coffee.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Three common pregnancy discomforts

The next nine months may bring some uncomfortable changes to your body. The good news is that many of these ills are not worrisome. Here are a few of the most common, plus tips to help soothe your symptoms.

## Morning sickness (nausea and vomiting)

Rising hormone levels and a hyperactive sense of smell cause many women to experience nausea and vomiting during pregnancy.

Tips to help:

- n Avoid foods or smells that make you feel sick.
- n Eat frequent, small meals.
- n Eat dry toast, crackers, dry cereal or pretzels before you get out of bed in the morning.
- n Avoid rich, spicy, acidic or fried foods.
- n Take your prenatal vitamins before you go to bed and with a snack. If you cannot keep down prenatal vitamins, call your doctor or nurse-midwife for other suggestions.

## Back pain

Back pain in pregnancy is usually caused by strain on the back muscles. As your uterus grows, your center of gravity changes. Your abdominal muscles, which help support the spine, stretch and get weaker in pregnancy, also contributing to back pain.

Tips to help:

- n Wear shoes with low heels and good arch support.

<!-- image -->

## When to call the doctor

- n Do not bend over from the waist to pick things up. Squat down, bend your knees and keep your back straight.
- n Sleep on your side and place one pillow between your knees and another under your abdomen.
- n Wear a pregnancy support band.
- n Ask your doctor or nurse-midwife for some exercises that help relieve back pain.

## Constipation

During pregnancy, higher levels of the hormone progesterone can cause constipation. It can also be caused by poor fluid and fiber intake. Tips to help:

- n Eat high-fiber foods, such as whole grains, fruits and vegetables. Fiber can also be found in kidney beans, lima beans, black-eyed peas and whole-grain cereals.
- n Drink plenty of water.
- n Exercise regularly, unless your doctor or nurse-midwife advises against it.
- n Do not ignore the urge to have a bowel movement; holding it in can lead to constipation.

## Find more tips online

Go to UHhospitals.org/HealthyPregnancy for more tips on how to stay comfortable during your pregnancy.

Be sure to watch for signs of the following pregnancy complications, which require medical attention:

- n Ectopic pregnancy: Many pregnant women experience spotting, but bleeding and lower abdominal pain can indicate a major problem, including ectopic pregnancy. This occurs when the embryo becomes implanted outside the uterus - usually in the fallopian tubes. Because an ectopic pregnancy could endanger your life, tell your doctor or nurse-midwife right away if you experience these symptoms.
- n Urinary tract infection (UTI): It is normal to urinate more often while you are pregnant. But if you feel burning during urination, need to go again right after urinating or notice blood in your urine, you may have a UTI. It is vital to seek treatment for a UTI, since it may lead to a kidney infection, which could trigger early labor.
- n Preeclampsia: Developing high blood pressure during late pregnancy may signal a potentially harmful condition called preeclampsia. Other warning signs may include: swelling that does not disappear after resting - especially in the face and hands, gaining more than five pounds a week, visual disturbances or abdominal pain.

<!-- image -->

## Take a look at classes, tours and groups

Most women say they want to make informed choices when they come to the hospital. A childbirth class is a great forum for expectant parents to ask questions and explore birth options.

## Learn what to expect during labor and delivery

In birthing classes, expectant moms learn how to cope with labor via breathing, relaxing and support from their partners. Each woman's partner is encouraged to take part in the labor and delivery process. These strategies can be helpful even for women who plan on having an epidural, an anesthetic that can make you more comfortable during labor.

## Form friendships

At childbirth classes, you can meet other parents who are going through the same changes and whose babies will be the same age as yours.

## Classes on childbirth and beyond

From Dancing for Birth to Breastfeeding to Boot Camp for Dads, University Hospitals MacDonald Women's Hospital offers a series of childbirth education classes and services designed to prepare you for a positive birthing and parenting experience.

You can find a listing of classes in the Childbirth and Parenting Education brochure inside this packet, at your doctor or nursemidwife's office or online at UHhospitals.org/BirthClass .

## Prepare with a prenatal tour

FREE tours of our facilities are available to help familiarize you with admitting procedures and other hospital routines. This includes tours of labor and delivery rooms and the Postpartum Unit. For more information, call the Women's Health Line at 216-844-4000 .

## A Baby-Friendly Hospital

<!-- image -->

UH MacDonald Women's Hospital has received international recognition as a Baby-Friendly designated maternity hospital, committed to providing the best possible environment for successful breastfeeding. To learn more about the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI), please visit BabyFriendlyUSA.org .

<!-- image -->

## Centering Pregnancy: Group prenatal care empowers moms and babies

University Hospitals MacDonald Women's Hospital's Centering Pregnancy Program helps women have healthy pregnancies by combining prenatal health assessment, education and psychosocial support all together in a group setting.

Each of the program's 10 sessions zeroes in on a particular topic, such as nutrition and healthy weight goals, relationship issues, what to expect during labor and birth, how to care for the baby afterward, postpartum depression and much more.

The Centering Pregnancy Program has positively impacted the lives of more than 800 expectant mothers and has shown better outcomes for both moms and babies than in traditional prenatal care, especially for moms who are considered at-risk.

UH MacDonald Women's Hospital also offers two other prenatal groups, including:

- n Diabetes in Pregnancy -designed for the unique needs of pregnant women with diabetes
- n Centering Parenting groups mothers and infants together for baby's first 15 months of life and supports parenting skills for both moms and dads, giving them tools to help them succeed as parents

To learn more about the Centering Pregnancy, Diabetes in Pregnancy or Centering Parenting programs, call 216-844-7403 .

<!-- image -->

## Building your birth vision

We all have a vision of our baby's birth. We respect and honor your birth wishes, and would like to help you come as close to that vision as possible while keeping you and your baby safe.

Some women choose to develop a birth plan for when they are in labor. Birth plans spell out your desires for what happens around the birth of your baby. Before you reach 36 weeks, it is important to discuss your wishes and preferences for your labor and birth with your doctor or nurse-midwife. Let us know if you have strong feelings or ideas around some aspect of your labor and birth. We will be happy to review your birth plan ahead of time.

It is also important to remember that, while we try to give you the birth experience you desire, labor does not always go as planned. Sometimes interventions that you were hoping to avoid become necessary to keep you and your baby safe. Our goal is to give you the best birth experience possible, while bringing your baby safely into the world.

## Personalized comfort measures support all moms-to-be

We recognize that each mother-to-be has different needs and desires. In addition to prepared childbirth classes, we offer classes in natural childbirth, hypnobirthing and dancing for birth. Learn more at UHhospitals.org/BirthClass .

As an academic medical center, we use the latest evidencebased practices to provide the best possible labor and birth outcomes for both you and your baby. The implementation of these practices has resulted in a primary cesarean section rate that is lower than state and national averages, and outcomes for vaginal birth after cesarean delivery (VBAC) that are significantly better than the national average.

Massage, relaxation breathing, music, standing under the warm water of a shower or soaking in a tub can all be great helps with labor. Intravenous pain medication and epidural are also available 24/7. If you want to use the tub, please let us know when you call us in labor and we will try to hold one of the tub rooms for you. Water birth (as opposed to water labor) is also offered by our nurse-midwifery practice and must be arranged in advance.

We encourage you to speak with your physician or nursemidwife about what comfort measures you are considering for your birth.

## Have more questions about signs of labor?

Visit our online healthy pregnancy and newborn library at UHhospitals.org/HealthyPregnancy to read more about what to expect during labor or signs of false labor.

## Know the signs of labor

Most women experience mild contractions, called BraxtonHicks contractions, in the third trimester. They may occur as low back pain that comes and goes, a sense of the baby balling up or menstrual cramps. Before 35 weeks, if you experience contractions more than six times an hour for two hours in a row, call your doctor or nurse-midwife.

## Signs of labor

Labor often starts out with mild contractions. False labor is very common. Real contractions are usually so intense that you have to change what you are doing in order to get through them, and people around you can tell that something is happening.

Once you are having intense contractions, start to check how often they are coming. When you are experiencing increasingly intense contractions every five minutes or closer for at least an hour, this is probably real labor.

Blood-tinged, mucous-like vaginal discharge is common in the weeks leading up to birth. Bleeding like a period is not normal and should be reported immediately. When your water breaks, it may be a large gush of fluid or a small continuous trickle. If you think that your water has broken or that you may be in labor, please call your doctor or nurse-midwife.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Find the right pediatrician today

Pregnancy is an exciting time filled with much preparation. One of the most important decisions you can make before your baby's arrival is choosing a doctor to serve as your trusted partner in caring for your little one.

## Partnering with parents to keep kids at their best

UH Rainbow Babies &amp; Children's Hospital offers the region's largest network of primary care pediatric and family medicine providers, who partner with parents to deliver the best care throughout their child's growth and development.

## Get started today!

With more than 80 locations, finding a Rainbow primary care provider for your baby has never been easier. Get started today at Rainbow.org/PrimaryCare .

## How to prepare for your hospital stay

One thing you can do to make your big day a positive one is to plan in advance. Use this checklist to prepare for your hospital stay, from before labor to heading home:

##  Complete paperwork for maternity leave/FMLA.

- n By law, FMLA papers need to be submitted 30 days before leave begins. The medical assistant or nurse working with your doctor or nursemidwife will complete the forms and fax them to your workplace. Please give our office at least two weeks to complete these forms.
-  Preregister for your hospital stay
- n at UHhospitals.org/ Request-An-Appointment .
-  Arrange for child care and visits.
- n If you wish to have your other children present during labor and delivery, please speak with your doctor or nurse-midwife ahead of time. Each child must be supervised by an adult (other than your primary support person).
-  Arrange for transportation to the hospital.
- n Valet parking services - located at the University Hospitals Rainbow Babies &amp; Children's Hospital main entrance on Adelbert Road - are available 24/7/365 for laboring moms.
- n For a hospital campus map, directions and parking information, including discounts, visit UHhospitals.org/ MacDonald/Patients-and-Visitors .
-  Bring a car seat for baby's trip home.
- n Ohio law requires that your baby be transported in a baby car seat. Please be sure to have a car seat available in your vehicle upon discharge.

<!-- image -->

## After baby's arrival

## The importance of skin-to-skin time

Right after birth, your baby will be placed on your chest, skin to skin. Skin-to-skin care provides many benefits. You and your baby will feel calmer, more comfortable and more secure. Your baby may even cry less. Your body temperature will adjust to help your new baby maintain normal body temperature. Your baby's father can be involved, too.

## Is breastfeeding right for you?

Breast milk is a wonderful gift that you can give your baby. Your breast milk has proteins that fight bacteria and viruses. Babies who are breastfed have fewer ear infections, diarrhea episodes and respiratory illnesses and experience long-term benefits, like a reduced incidence of cancer, heart disease and obesity. Breastfed babies have higher intelligence scores, better vision and better digestion.

Breastfeeding also benefits your health. Women who breastfeed have decreased rates of breast cancer and ovarian cancer, diabetes, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis and depression. Breastfeeding will help you lose more weight and reduces postpartum bleeding.

## Need extra help with breastfeeding?

The Lactation Centers located at University Hospitals Chagrin Highlands Health Center and UH Westlake Health Center provide assistance to mothers and babies who need a little extra support with breastfeeding. Certified lactation consultants are available to work with you and your infant to ensure a successful and satisfying experience. The Lactation Centers also have electric pump rental/ sales, maternity/breastfeeding bras and other breastfeeding supplies available.

For more information or to make an appointment, call Eastside: 440-995-3830 or Westside: 440-250-2035 .

## More breastfeeding resources for families

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that babies be exclusively breastfed for about the first six months of life. This means your baby needs no additional foods (except Vitamin D) or fluids unless medically indicated. Babies should continue to breastfeed for a year and for as long as it is mutually desired by the mother and baby. We encourage you to breastfeed and we offer prenatal classes for those considering it. In addition to certified lactation consultants, the nurses on the Labor and Delivery and Postpartum Units are also trained to assist you with breastfeeding.

Whether you are a new mom or a seasoned parenting pro, breastfeeding often comes with its fair share of questions. Visit UHhospitals.org/Breastfeeding for answers to common questions. You can also learn about the hospital's Breast for Success program, which offers a variety of tools and resources for the whole family.

## The postpartum phase

Your postpartum period begins as soon as you give birth and lasts for six weeks. You will need to take some time after childbirth to rest. Resume normal activities slowly and do not be afraid to ask for help. Your first two weeks at home should be spent caring for yourself and bonding with your baby. Driving can resume when you no longer need narcotic pain medication and you feel comfortable enough to react in an emergency, and to twist around to see as you back up. Avoid strenuous activity for four to six weeks and until you discuss it with your doctor or nurse-midwife. You can return to work after six weeks and after you see us for your postpartum visit.

Visit UHhospitals.org/HealthyPregnancy to read more about the postpartum period.

<!-- image -->

If you are in labor or have urgent questions, please call your prenatal care provider.

## University Hospitals MacDonald Women's Hospital

## Patient information

216-844-3911

## Labor and Delivery

216-844-1620

## Preregistration

1-866-UH4-CARE (1-866-844-2273) UHhospitals.org/ Request-An-Appointment

## Financial counselor/ Insurance Access Line

216-983-1500 or 1-844-297-8817 (toll free)

## Paternity resources/

birth certificate information

216-844-5838

## Find a Rainbow pediatrician

216-844-7246 or Rainbow.org/PrimaryCare

## Education

## University Hospitals MacDonald Women's Hospital

- Education Center 440-995-3831

- Lactation Center Eastside 440-995-3830

- Lactation Center Westside 440-250-2035

- Women's Health Line 216-844-4000

Centering Pregnancy, Centering

Parenting and Sugar Mamas

216-844-7403

## Online resources

Healthy pregnancy and newborn library

UHhospitals.org/HealthyPregnancy

## Breastfeeding resources

UHhospitals.org/Breastfeeding

Childbirth and parenting classes

UHhospitals.org/BirthClass

Pregnancy and parenting

e-newsletter

UHhospitals.org/GrowKids

Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative BabyFriendlyUSA.org

My UHCare

MyUHCare.UHhospitals.org

## Community resources

Center for Prevention of

Domestic Violence

216-391-HELP (216-391-4357)

Cuyahoga County WIC program

216-957-9421

Help Me Grow

216-844-5545

La Leche League (breastfeeding)

800-525-3243

Mobile Crisis Hotline (mental health/suicide)

216-623-6888

Rape Crisis Center

216-619-6194

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Postpartum

Car seat class

216-844-2277

Alternaterm -

classes and counseling

216-371-4848

Womankind

216-662-5700

For additional resources,

visit

UHhospitals.org/Pregnancy .

10799

<!-- image -->