## MAKE A PLAN My Health Beyond Pregnancy

## WHAT HAPPENS NOW?

<!-- image -->

Your pregnancy and birth experiences may have been hard because of medical issues such as hypertension and preeclampsia. You deserve physical and emotional support around you to process your experience and to understand what happens next. Make sure your body can recover and rest in a place where you can be cared for by those around you. Reach out for help with any food, safety, housing, childcare, or transportation concerns.

## Know Your Risk

<!-- image -->

## WHY IS MY FOLLOW-UP CARE IMPORTANT?

Telling your pregnancy story can help you get the care you need from your healthcare providers. Working together to monitor your current and future health can help prevent heart problems now and later in life.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Use this checklist to note any pregnancy complications you may wish to discuss with your healthcare provider.

## My birth experience was affected by:

## My baby/babies experienced:

- [ ] £ Preeclampsia

- [ ] £ Eclampsia

- [ ] £ Gestational hypertension

- [ ] £ HELLP syndrome

- [ ] £ Gestational diabetes

- [ ] £ Preterm birth (&lt;37 weeks)

- [ ] £ Mental health symptoms or diagnosis (e.g., depression, anxiety, PTSD)

- [ ] £ Something else:

- [ ] £ Premature delivery

- [ ] £ Stillbirth

- [ ] £ Infant loss after delivery

- [ ] £ Small for gestational age (SGA)

- [ ] £ Fetal growth restriction (FGR)

- [ ] £ Neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) stay

- [ ] Something else:

<!-- image -->

## WHY TRACK MY BLOOD PRESSURE?

It is important to keep track of your blood pressure to help prevent medical issues due to high blood pressure in the weeks and months after delivery. Use your phone camera to scan the QR code to learn how to check your blood pressure on your own.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## MAKE A PLAN My Health Beyond Pregnancy

## WHAT CAN A PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER DO FOR ME NOW?

A PCP is your 'go-to' healthcare provider that monitors your overall health and prevents and treats any health conditions. They can also refer you to other specialists and help screen for heart disease and other health conditions. If you do not have a PCP or health insurance, ask your pregnancy care team for options for local healthcare. You may also check out findhelp.org for other support resources.

## HOW DO I TALK TO MY CARE PROVIDERS?

Sometimes it can be hard to know what questions and concerns you might wish to discuss. Here are some ideas to help get the conversation started:

<!-- image -->

- £ Can we consider checking my blood counts, cholesterol, glucose, and/or kidney and liver function?
- £ I am feeling anxious and/or blue. Can you tell me more about mental health resources available to help me feel better?
- £ What kind of birth control methods could work well for me?
- £ Do you have any advice for me to safely become pregnant again?
- £ I am worried about my housing, income, food security, etc. Can you tell me more about what resources may be available to help me?
- £ Does it make sense for me to see a specialist, such as a cardiologist? If so, can you please connect me with them?

## 10 TIPS FOR YOUR LONG-TERM HEALTH 2

Aim for blood pressure below 130/80.

Work with a provider to find a healthy weight for you.

Aim for quality and consistent sleep, at least 7-8 hours each night.

Get moving for 20+ minutes each day. 3

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Consider taking lowdose aspirin during your next pregnancy.

Talk to a healthcare provider about choosing a safe and reliable birth control method.

Go for regular checkups with screenings for heart disease and diabetes.

<!-- image -->

Live in a smoke-free environment.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Eat healthy - Include vegetables and whole grains. Watch your salt, fat, and sugar intake.

<!-- image -->

Reach out to a healthcare provider about mental health support if you are feeling anxious or blue.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## MAKE A PLAN My Health Beyond Pregnancy

Tracking your health and lifestyle goals can help you and your care team understand how you are recovering after a complicated pregnancy. Use this table to track your health goals beyond pregnancy and note any questions or concerns you may wish to discuss.

## Tracking My Recovery Goals Beyond Pregnancy

| Time Since Delivery (Date)   | Blood Pressure (mmHg)   | Health Provider Contact   | Sleep   | Healthy Eating   | Physical Activity   | Mental Health   | Questions or Concerns I Have   |
|------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------|---------|------------------|---------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|
| 3 MONTHS:                    |                         |                           |         |                  |                     |                 |                                |
| 6 MONTHS:                    |                         |                           |         |                  |                     |                 |                                |
| 12 MONTHS: ______________    |                         |                           |         |                  |                     |                 |                                |
| 2 YEARS+:                    |                         |                           |         |                  |                     |                 |                                |

<!-- image -->

## WHAT FOLLOW-UP TESTING MIGHT I NEED?

Your provider can run routine tests to check how your body is recovering after pregnancy. They may test for diabetes, cholesterol, blood counts, and kidney and liver function. Use your phone camera to scan the QR code to learn more about what routine tests you may need after pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

1. Mehta PK, Minissian M, Bairey Merz CN. Adverse pregnancy outcomes and cardiovascular risk factor management. Semin Perinatol. 2015 Jun;39(4):268-75. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2015.05.005. Epub 2015 Jul 6. PMID: 26159741; PMCID: PMC4516636. 2. American Heart Association: Life's Essential 8. https:/ /www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-lifestyle/lifes-essential-8 3. World Health Organization: Every move counts toward better health. https:/ /www.who.int/news/item/25-11-2020-every-move-counts-towards-better-health-says-who

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->