<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

http://www.womenshealth.gov 1-800-994-9662

TDD: 1-888-220-5446

page 1

## Do's and Don'ts

Print-and-Go Guide

Eat this. Don't eat that. Do this. Don't do that. Pregnant women are bombarded with Do's and Don'ts. It's tough to keep it all straight. Pregnancy Do's are listed below. The next page has a list of pregnancy Don'ts.

## Pregnancy Do's

- See	your	doctor	regularly.	Prenatal	care can help keep you and your baby healthy and spot problems if they occur.
- Continue	taking	folic	acid	throughout your pregnancy. All women capable of pregnancy should get 400 to 800 micrograms (400 to 800 mcg or 0.4 to 0.8 mg) of folic acid every day.  Getting enough folic acid lowers the risk of some birth defects. Taking a vitamin with folic acid will help you to be sure you are getting enough.
- Eat	a	variety	of	healthy	foods.	Include fruits, vegetables, whole grains, calciumrich foods, lean meats, and a variety of cooked seafood.
- Get	all	essential	nutrients,	including	iron, every day. Getting enough iron prevents anemia, which is linked to preterm birth and low-birth weight babies.  Ask your doctor about taking a daily prenatal vitamin or iron supplement.
- Drink	extra	fluids,	especially	water.
- Get	moving!	Unless	your	doctor	tells	you otherwise, physical activity is good for you and your baby.
- Gain	a	healthy	amount	of	weight.	Gaining more than the recommended amount during pregnancy increases a woman's risk for pregnancy complications. It also makes it harder to lose the extra pounds
- after	childbirth.	Check	with	your	doctor to find out how much weight you should gain during pregnancy.
- Wash	hands,	especially	after	handling	raw meat or using the bathroom.
- Get	enough	sleep.	Aim	for	7	to	9	hours every night. Resting on your left side helps blood flow to you and your baby and	prevents	swelling.	Using	pillows between your legs and under your belly will help you get comfortable.
- Set	limits.	If	you	can,	control	the	stress in your life and set limits. Don't be afraid to say 'no' to requests for your time and energy. Ask for help from others.
- Make	sure	health	problems	are	treated	and kept under control. If you have diabetes, control your blood sugar levels. If you have high blood pressure, monitor it closely.
- Ask	your	doctor	before	stopping	any medicines you take or taking any new medicines. Prescription, over-thecounter, and herbal medicine all can harm your baby.
- Get	a	flu	shot.	Pregnant	women	can get very sick from the flu and may need hospital care. Ask your doctor about the f lu vaccine.
- Always	wear	a	seatbelt.	The	lap	strap should go under your belly, across your hips. The shoulder strap should go between your breasts and to the side of your	belly.	Make	sure	it	fits	snuggly.
- Join	a	childbirth	or	parenting	class.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

http://www.womenshealth.gov 1-800-994-9662

TDD: 1-888-220-5446

page 2

Steer	clear	of	these	pregnancy	no-nos to help keep you and your baby safe and healthy.

## Pregnancy Don'ts

- Don't	smoke	tobacco.	Quitting	is	hard, but	you	can	do	it!	Ask	your	doctor	for help.	Smoking	during	pregnancy	passes nicotine and cancer-causing drugs to your baby.	Smoking	also	keeps	your	baby	from getting needed nourishment and raises the risk of miscarriage, preterm birth, and infant death.
- Avoid	exposure	to	toxic	substances	and chemicals, such as cleaning solvents, lead and mercury, some insecticides, and paint. Pregnant women should avoid exposure to paint fumes.
- Protect	yourself	and	your	baby	from	foodborne illness, which can cause serious health problems and even death. Handle, clean, cook, eat, and store food properly.
- Don't	drink	alcohol.	There	is	no	known safe amount of alcohol a woman can drink while pregnant. Both drinking every day and drinking a lot of alcohol once in a while during pregnancy can harm the baby.
- Don't	use	illegal	drugs.	Tell	your	doctor if	you	are	using	drugs.	Marijuana, cocaine, heroin, speed (amphetamines), barbiturates,	and	LSD	are	very	dangerous for you and your baby.

Content	last	updated	March	5,	2009.

## HealtHy Pregnancy

- Don't	clean	or	change	a	cat's	litter box. This could put you at risk for toxoplasmosis, an infection that can be very harmful to the fetus.
- Don't	eat	swordfish,	king	mackerel,	shark, and tilefish, which are high in mercury.
- Avoid	contact	with	rodents	and	with	their urine, droppings, or nesting material. This includes household pests and pet rodents, such as guinea pigs and hamsters. Rodents can carry a virus that can be harmful or even deadly to your unborn baby.
- Don't	take	very	hot	baths	or	use	hot tubs or saunas. High temperatures can be harmful to the fetus, or cause you to faint.
- Don't	use	scented	feminine	hygiene products. Pregnant women should avoid scented sprays, sanitary napkins, and bubble bath. These products might irritate your vaginal area, and increase your risk of a urinary tract infection or yeast infection.
- Don't	douche.	Douching	can	irritate	the vagina, force air into the birth canal and increase the risk of infection.
- Avoid	x-rays.	If	you	must	have	dental work or diagnostic tests, tell your dentist or physician that you are pregnant so that extra care can be taken.