<!-- image -->

## The Management of Nausea and  Vomiting of Pregnancy and Hyperemesis Gravidarum

Green-top Guideline No. 69 June 2016

<!-- image -->

## The Management of Nausea and Vomiting of Pregnancy and Hyperemesis Gravidarum

This is the first edition of this guideline.

## Executive summary of recommendations

Diagnosis of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG)

How is NVP diagnosed?

- NVP should only be diagnosed when onset is in the first trimester of pregnancy and other causes of nausea and vomiting have been excluded. D

How is HG diagnosed?

- HG can be diagnosed when there is protracted NVP with the triad of more than 5% prepregnancy weight loss, dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. D

How can the severity of NVP be classified?

- An  objective  and  validated  index  of  nausea  and  vomiting  such  as  the  Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) score can be used to classify the severity of NVP. C

What initial clinical assessment and baseline investigations should be done before deciding on treatment?

- Clinicians should be aware of the features in history, examination and investigation that allow NVP and HG to be assessed and diagnosed and for their severity to be monitored. /check

What are the differential diagnoses?

- Other  pathological  causes  should  be  excluded  by  clinical  history,  focused  examination  and investigations. /check

What is the initial management of NVP and HG?

How should the woman be managed?

- Women with mild NVP should be managed in the community with antiemetics. D

- Ambulatory daycare management should be used for suitable patients when community/primary care measures have failed and where the PUQE score is less than 13. C

Inpatient management should be considered if there is at least one of the following:

- continued nausea and vomiting and inability to keep down oral antiemetics

- continued nausea and vomiting associated with ketonuria and/or weight loss (greater than 5% of body weight), despite oral antiemetics

- confirmed or suspected comorbidity (such as urinary tract infection and inability to tolerate oral antibiotics).

/check

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

What therapeutic options are available for NVP and HG? What is the safety and efficacy of pharmacological agents?

<!-- image -->

Which complementary therapies could be helpful?

Ginger

Ginger may be used by women wishing to avoid antiemetic therapies in mild to moderate NVP.

Acustimulations - acupressure and acupuncture

- Women may be reassured that acustimulations are safe in pregnancy. Acupressure may improve NVP. B

Hypnosis

Hypnotic therapies should not be recommended to manage NVP and HG.

Monitoring and adverse effects

What  complications  or  adverse  effects  can  occur  from  NVP  and  HG  and  what  are  their  preventive/ management strategies?

- Urea and serum electrolyte levels should be checked daily in women requiring intravenous fluids. /check

Histamine H2 receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors may be used for women developing

gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, oesophagitis or gastritis.

- Thiamine supplementation (either oral or intravenous) should be given to all women admitted with prolonged vomiting, especially before administration of dextrose or parenteral nutrition. D

- Women admitted with HG should be offered thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin unless there are specific contraindications such as active bleeding. Thromboprophylaxis can be discontinued upon discharge. C

- Women with previous or current NVP or HG should consider avoiding iron-containing preparations if these exacerbate the symptoms. D

Further management

What is the role of the multidisciplinary team?

- In women with severe NVP or HG, input may be required from other professionals, such as midwives, nurses, dieticians, pharmacists, endocrinologists, nutritionists and gastroenterologists, and a mental health team, including a psychiatrist. D

When should enteral and parenteral nutrition be considered and what are the risks to the mother and fetus?

- When all other medical therapies have failed, enteral or parenteral treatment should be considered with a multidisciplinary approach. D

When should termination of pregnancy be considered?

All therapeutic measures should have been tried before offering termination of a wanted pregnancy.

A

D

D

D

<!-- image -->

## Discharge and follow-up

What discharge and follow-up arrangements should be implemented?

Women with NVP and HG should have an individualised management plan in place when they are discharged from hospital.

Women with severe NVP or HG who have continued symptoms into the late second or the third

trimester should be offered serial scans to monitor fetal growth.

What is the effect of NVP and HG in the postnatal period?

How should we advise about future pregnancies?

Women with previous HG should be advised that there is a risk of recurrence in future pregnancies.

Early use of lifestyle/dietary modifications and antiemetics that were found to be useful in the index

pregnancy is advisable to reduce the risk of NVP and HG in the current pregnancy.

What is the effect of NVP and HG on quality of life?

A woman's quality of life can be adversely affected by NVP and HG and practitioners should address

the severity of a woman's symptoms in relation to her quality of life and social situation.

Practitioners should assess a woman's mental health status during the pregnancy and postnatally

and refer for psychological support if necessary.

Women should be referred to sources of psychosocial support.

Practitioners should validate the woman's physical symptoms and psychological distress.

Women should be advised to rest as required to alleviate symptoms.

/check

C

D

C

C

C

D

D

D

<!-- image -->

## 1. Purpose and scope

There is variation in the management of women who have nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) or hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) with an occasional lack of understanding of its severity and options for treatment and support.

The aim of this guideline is to provide evidence-based or best clinical practice information regarding the diagnosis  and  subsequent  management  of  NVP  and  HG  across  community,  ambulatory  daycare  and inpatient settings. It gives advice for multidisciplinary professionals involved in the care of women with these conditions, including how to counsel and support women before, during and after their pregnancies.

## 2. Introduction and background epidemiology

NVP affects up to 80% of pregnant women 1 and is one of the most common indications for hospital admission among pregnant women, with typical stays of between 3 and 4 days. 2-4 For this guideline, NVP is defined as the symptom of nausea and/or vomiting during early pregnancy where there are no other causes. HG is the severe form of NVP , which affects about 0.3-3.6% of pregnant women. 1,5-7 Reported HG recurrence rates vary, from 15.2% in a Norwegian hospital registry study 8 to 81% if using self-reported diagnosis. 9

The aetiological theories for NVP and HG range from the fetoprotective and genetic to the biochemical, immunological and biosocial. 10,11 They are primarily thought to be associated with rising levels of beta human  chorionic  gonadotrophin  (hCG)  hormone,  and  conditions  with  higher  hCG  levels,  such  as trophoblastic disease and multiple pregnancy, have been associated with increased severity of NVP . 12,13

## 3. Identification and assessment of evidence

This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of Obstetricians  and  Gynaecologists  (RCOG)  Green-top  Guidelines.  Databases  searched  included  the Cochrane Library, EMBASE and MEDLINE. The databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings, and this was combined with a keyword search. Search terms included 'nausea and vomiting', 'vomiting', 'nausea', 'hyperemesis', 'morning sickness', 'antiemetic agent', 'fluids' and 'hydration'. The search was inclusive of all relevant articles published up to August 2015. The National Guideline Clearinghouse, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Evidence Search, Trip, Guidelines International Network and Geneva Foundation for Medical Education and Research website were also searched for relevant guidelines and reviews.

Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. Areas lacking evidence are highlighted and annotated as 'good practice points'. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the grading of recommendations may be found in Appendix I.

## 4. Diagnosis of NVP and HG

## 4.1 How is NVP diagnosed?

NVP should only be diagnosed when onset is in the first trimester of pregnancy and other causes of nausea and vomiting have been excluded.

Onset of NVP is in the first trimester and if the initial onset is after 10 +6 weeks of gestation, other causes need to be considered. It typically starts between the fourth and seventh weeks of gestation, peaks in approximately the ninth week and resolves by the 20th week in 90% of women. 14

## 4.2 How is HG diagnosed?

HG can be diagnosed when there is protracted NVP with the triad of more than 5% prepregnancy weight loss, dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.

HG is characterised by severe, protracted nausea and vomiting associated with weight loss of more than 5% of prepregnancy weight, dehydration and electrolyte imbalances. 7

## 4.3 How can the severity of NVP be classified?

An  objective  and  validated  index  of  nausea  and  vomiting  such  as  the  Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) score can be used to classify the severity of NVP.

Objective, validated measures for the severity of nausea and vomiting include the Rhodes Index and the PUQE index. The Rhodes Index 15,16 was originally validated to measure nausea and vomiting in chemotherapy patients, including assessment of physical symptoms and the resulting stress, but has subsequently been used for NVP . A shorter disease-specific questionnaire (PUQE) was developed by the Motherisk Program, 17 an NVP helpline in Canada, which highly correlated with the Rhodes Index. 18 The PUQE was modified to include symptom profile over the previous

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2-

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2-

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2+

24 hours including a wellbeing score that correlated with hydration status and, more recently, over a longer period of time. 19,20 The PUQE score can be used to determine whether the NVP is mild, moderate or severe (Appendix II) and can be used to track progress with treatment.

Evidence level 2+

## 5. What initial clinical assessment and baseline investigations should be done before deciding on treatment?

Clinicians should be aware of the features in history, examination and investigation that allow NVP and HG to be assessed and diagnosed and for their severity to be monitored.

/check

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Features in the history, examination and investigations to monitor severity and other causes

<!-- image -->

Reported HG recurrence rates vary, from 15.2% in a Norwegian hospital registry study 8 to 81% if using self-reported diagnosis. 9 However, the incidence of HG reduces in a second pregnancy if  there is a change in paternity (10.9%) compared with no change (16%; adjusted OR 0.6, 95% CI 0.39-0.92). 8,21

NVP  and  HG  are  associated  with  hyponatraemia,  hypokalaemia,  low  serum  urea,  raised haematocrit and ketonuria with a metabolic hypochloraemic alkalosis. If severe, a metabolic acidaemia may develop. In two-thirds of patients with HG, there may be abnormal thyroid function tests (based on a structural similarity between thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] and hCG) with a biochemical thyrotoxicosis and raised free thyroxine levels with or without a suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone level. These patients rarely have thyroid antibodies and are euthyroid clinically. The biochemical thyrotoxicosis resolves as the HG improves 22 and treatment with antithyroid drugs is inappropriate.

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 2-

Liver function tests are abnormal in up to 40% of women with HG, 23 with the most likely abnormality being a rise in transaminases. Bilirubin levels can be slightly raised but without jaundice, and amylase levels can be mildly raised too. These abnormalities improve as the HG resolves.

Evidence level 3

An ultrasound scan should be scheduled to confirm viability and gestational age and to rule out multiple pregnancy or trophoblastic disease. Unless there are other medical reasons for an urgent scan, this can be scheduled for the next available appointment as long as the NVP has resolved with treatment.

## 5.1 What are the differential diagnoses?

Other  pathological  causes  should  be  excluded  by  clinical  history,  focused  examination  and investigations.

/check

<!-- image -->

Other  pathological  causes  of  nausea  and  vomiting  include  peptic  ulcers,  cholecystitis, gastroenteritis, hepatitis, pancreatitis, genitourinary conditions such as urinary tract infection or pyelonephritis, metabolic conditions, neurological conditions and drug-induced nausea and vomiting. 24-26

Evidence level 3

Severe abdominal or epigastric pain is unusual in NVP and HG and may warrant further investigation of serum amylase levels and an abdominal ultrasound, and possibly oesophageal gastroduodenoscopy, which is considered safe in pregnancy.

Chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori can be associated with NVP and HG and testing for H. pylori antibodies may be considered. 27,28 Evidence level 2+

## 6. What is the initial management of NVP and HG?

## 6.1 How should the woman be managed?

Women with mild NVP should be managed in the community with antiemetics.

Ambulatory daycare management should be used for suitable patients when community/primary care measures have failed and where the PUQE score is less than 13.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Inpatient management should be considered if there is at least one of the following:

- continued nausea and vomiting and inability to keep down oral antiemetics
- continued nausea and vomiting associated with ketonuria and/or weight loss (greater than 5% of body weight), despite oral antiemetics
- confirmed or suspected comorbidity (such as urinary tract infection and inability to tolerate oral antibiotics).

Since most women with NVP require only oral antiemetics, management in the community/ primary care is appropriate to avoid unnecessary hospital admissions and disruption to the woman's life. 29 Women who have vomiting but are not dehydrated can be managed in the community with antiemetics, support, reassurance, oral hydration and dietary advice.

/check

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 4

If  women  are  unable  to  tolerate  oral  antiemetics  or  oral  fluids  then  ambulatory  daycare management, which provides parenteral fluids, parenteral vitamins (multi and B-complex) 30 and antiemetics, is appropriate if local resources allow. Various regimens have been shown to be effective. 31 A randomised controlled trial (RCT) 32 of 98 women showed that ambulatory daycare management involving intravenous fluids and stepwise increments in antiemetic therapy versus inpatient management was acceptable to women and resulted in reduced inpatient stay. In a study of 428 women 31 who had ambulatory daycare subcutaneous metoclopramide therapy (SMT), improvement in symptoms occurred in 89.3%. Those women who failed the SMT regimen (10.7%) had higher mean PUQE scores at the start of ambulatory daycare treatment than those for which it was successful (10 ± 3 versus 7.6 ± 2.8 respectively, P &lt; 0.001). Moreover, they were more likely to have a PUQE score of 13 or higher, they had an earlier gestational age at the start of SMT (9.7 ± 2.9 weeks versus 11.4 ± 3.2 weeks, P = 0.005) and they were more likely to need intravenous hydration (91.3% versus 65.2%, P &lt; 0.001). In addition to the SMT regimen, women received adjuvant therapies at home such as intravenous hydration, subcutaneous ondansetron, histamine H2 receptor antagonists, and 2.1% received total parenteral nutrition. Ambulatory daycare management has been successfully and safely set up in units and is associated with high patient satisfaction. 33

Evidence level 2+

Women who have recurrent NVP/HG despite adequate ambulatory daycare treatment should be managed as inpatients due to the associated complications, in particular electrolyte imbalance and nutritional deficiencies.

## 6.2 What therapeutic options are available for NVP and HG?

## 6.2.1 What is the safety and efficacy of pharmacological agents?

## Antiemetics

| There are safety and efficacy data for first-line antiemetics such as antihistamines (H1 receptor antagonists) and phenothiazines and they should be prescribed when required for NVP and HG (Appendix III).                                                                 | C      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|
| Combinations of different drugs should be used in womenwhodonotrespondtoasingle antiemetic.                                                                                                                                                                                  | /check |
| For women with persistent or severe HG, the parenteral or rectal route may be necessary and more effective than an oral regimen.                                                                                                                                             | /check |
| Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic therapies. Drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms and oculogyric crises can occur with the use of phenothiazines and metoclopramide. If this occurs, there should be prompt cessation of the medications. | B      |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Clinicians should use antiemetics with which they are familiar and should use drugs from different classes if the first drug is not effective. Metoclopramide is safe and effective, but because of the risk of extrapyramidal effects it should be used as second-line therapy. There is evidence that ondansetron is safe and effective, but because data are limited it should be used as second-line therapy. A Cochrane review 5 and other systematic reviews and meta-analyses 34-36 and birth registry data 36 have reported on the safety and efficacy of many antiemetics for use in NVP and HG, with no increased risk of teratogenesis or other adverse pregnancy outcomes. These drugs include: antihistamines (histamine H1 receptor antagonists) such as promethazine, cyclizine, cinnarizine, doxylamine 37 and dimenhydrinate; phenothiazines including prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine and perphenazine; and dopamine antagonists including metoclopramide 38 and domperidone. Because different drug classes may have different mechanisms of action and therefore synergistic effects, combinations of drugs from different classes should be used in women who do not respond to a single antiemetic. Furthermore, persistent vomiting may mean that oral doses of antiemetics are not absorbed and therefore the intravenous, rectal, subcutaneous or intramuscular routes may be necessary and more effective. Due to the risk of extrapyramidal effects with metoclopramide it should be used as second-line therapy.  A  review  of  metoclopramide, 39 conducted  by  the  European  Medicines  Agency's Committee for  Medicinal  Products  for  Human  Use,  has  confirmed  the  risks  of  short-term extrapyramidal disorders and tardive dyskinesia, particularly  in  young  people.  The  review recommends metoclopramide should only be prescribed for short-term use (maximum dose of 30 mg in 24 hours or 0.5 mg/kg body weight in 24 hours [whichever is lowest] and maximum duration of 5 days) and that intravenous doses should be administered by slow bolus injection over at least 3 minutes to help minimise these risks. Dystonic reactions have been shown to be significantly less common in nonpregnant patients receiving a slow infusion as opposed to a bolus injection of 10 mg of metoclopramide. 40 Studies on the safety of ondansetron are mixed. A large retrospective analysis 41 of data from the Danish birth registry of 608 385 pregnancies found no increased risk of major birth defect, stillbirth, preterm labour or small-for-gestational age. However, a case-control study 42 with 4524 cases and 5859 controls found a two-fold increased risk of cleft palate (adjusted OR 2.37, 95% CI 1.18-4.76), although the authors suggest that this association may be due to chance due to the large number of variables investigated. Data from the Swedish Medical and Birth Register 43 demonstrated  a  small  increased  risk  of  cardiovascular  defects  and  cardiac  septal  defects (OR 1.62, 95% CI 1.04-2.14, and risk ratio 2.05, 95% CI 1.19-3.28, respectively). For these reasons, the use of ondansetron should be limited to patients who are not adequately managed on the aforementioned antiemetics and preferably used after the first trimester of pregnancy. B B C Evidence level 2++ Evidence level 2++ Evidence level 2+

Three small randomised studies 44-46 have shown ondansetron to be superior to doxylamine and pyridoxine in reducing nausea and vomiting, 44 equally effective but with fewer adverse effects than metoclopramide 45 and more effective at reducing severe vomiting than metoclopramide. 46

Suggested antiemetics for UK use are given in Appendix III.

## Pyridoxine

## Pyridoxine is not recommended for NVP and HG.

There is no association between the degree of NVP at 12 weeks and vitamin B6 levels measured at 15 weeks. 47 A Cochrane review 5 concluded that there is a lack of consistent evidence that pyridoxine is an effective therapy for NVP . Furthermore, a placebo-controlled trial 48 of its use in HG did not demonstrate any improvement in nausea, vomiting or rehospitalisation in 46 women given  20 mg  orally  three  times  a  day  in  addition  to  intravenous  fluids,  intravenous metoclopramide three times a day and oral thiamine compared to the control group given placebo in addition to standard therapy. A matched nonrandomised study 49 demonstrated that the combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine was significantly more effective than pyridoxine alone.

## Corticosteroids

## Corticosteroids should be reserved for cases where standard therapies have failed.

Corticosteroids have resulted in dramatic and rapid improvement in case series of women with refractory HG. 50 The results of randomised studies are conflicting 51 and the largest study failed to show improvement in the primary outcome of rehospitalisation (however, both groups also received  metoclopramide  and  promethazine). 52,53 Case  selection  and  route  and  dose  of corticosteroid administration may explain the different results, with beneficial results being described in more severe cases of HG. A prospective double-blind study 54 of 40 women admitted to intensive care with severe HG demonstrated that daily intravenous hydrocortisone 300 mg was superior to intravenous metoclopramide in reducing vomiting and recurrence.

Corticosteroids  should  not  be  used  until  conventional  treatment  with  intravenous  fluid replacement  and  regular antiemetics has failed. The  suggested  dose  is  intravenous hydrocortisone 100 mg twice daily, and once clinical improvement occurs convert to oral prednisolone 40-50 mg daily, with the dose gradually tapered until the lowest maintenance dose that controls the symptoms is reached. In most cases prednisolone needs to be continued until the gestational age at which HG would have typically resolved and in some extreme cases this occurs at delivery. 29

## Diazepam

Diazepam is not recommended for the management of NVP or HG.

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2++

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 1+

Evidence level 4

<!-- image -->

A randomised trial 55 investigated 50 women with HG; they were treated with infusions of saline, glucose, vitamins and randomly allocated diazepam. While the addition of diazepam to the treatment regimen reduced nausea, there was no difference in vomiting between those treated with or without diazepam.

Evidence level 1-

## 6.2.2 What is the best rehydration regimen for ambulatory daycare and inpatient management?

Normal saline with additional potassium chloride in each bag, with administration guided by daily monitoring of electrolytes, is the most appropriate intravenous hydration.

Dextrose infusions are not appropriate unless the serum sodium levels are normal and thiamine has been administered.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The most important intervention is likely to be appropriate intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement. There is no evidence to determine which fluid regimen is most appropriate but given that most women admitted to hospital with HG are hyponatraemic, hypochloraemic, hypokalaemic and ketotic, it seems appropriate to use normal saline and potassium chloride. General  adult  fluid  management  guidance  can  be  found  in  NICE  clinical  guideline  174. 56 Dextrose-containing solutions can precipitate Wernicke's encephalopathy in thiamine-deficient states (see section 7.1); hence, each day intravenous dextrose is administered, high (e.g. 100 mg) doses of parenteral thiamine should be given to prevent Wernicke's encephalopathy.

Appendix IV provides a summary treatment algorithm for NVP and HG.

## 6.2.3 Which complementary therapies could be helpful?

## Ginger

## Ginger may be used by women wishing to avoid antiemetic therapies in mild to moderate NVP.

Three systematic reviews 57-59 have addressed the effectiveness of ginger for NVP . One found four RCTs that met the criteria and all found that oral ginger was more effective than placebo in reducing nausea and vomiting. 57 The second included a total of ten RCTs, comparing ginger with placebo (five studies), with vitamin B6 (four studies), and one with dimenhydrinate. Ginger was superior to placebo and equal to vitamin B6 and dimenhydrinate at improving nausea and vomiting. 58 The third analysed six studies and 508 subjects randomised to ginger or placebo and concluded that ginger was effective. 59 Ginger was superior to placebo but less effective than metoclopramide  in  a  randomised  trial  including  102  patients  with  NVP . 60 Another  group investigated the effect of ginger biscuits and found them to be better than placebo at reducing nausea. 61 No studies have addressed the effect of ginger in HG under the current definition.

No increased risk of major malformations has been reported with use of ginger; 62,63 however, one review 64 highlighted  potential  maternal  adverse  effects,  including  an  anticoagulant  effect, stomach irritation and a potential interaction with beta blockers and benzodiazepines.

## Acustimulations - acupressure and acupuncture

## Women may be reassured that acustimulations are safe in pregnancy. Acupressure may improve NVP.

Acupuncture is safe in pregnancy. 65 A systematic review 66 has addressed the efficacy in NVP of acustimulations (i.e. acupuncture, acupressure and electrical stimulation) at the pericardium 6 (PC6; Nei Guan) point. PC6 is located about 2.5 finger breadths up from the wrist crease on the inside of the forearm, between the tendons of palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis. The review included 14 studies, and meta-analysis demonstrated acupressure applied by finger pressure  or  wristband  and  electrical  stimulation  both  reduced  NVP ,  but  acupuncture methods did not. There was a placebo effect observed for improvement in nausea (three trials) and vomiting (five trials) when compared with controls. There is less evidence for a beneficial effect  on  vomiting. 67 A  later  systematic  review 68 found  six  RCTs  including  399  patients examining the effect of acupressure. Five studies reported positive results and, of these, two (102 patients) were in women with HG.

Evidence level 3

A

Evidence level 1++

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 1+

## Hypnosis

## Hypnotic therapies should not be recommended to manage NVP and HG.

A review 69 of six studies reporting hypnosis for HG, mainly small case series, concluded that the evidence was not sufficient to establish whether hypnosis (trance induction) is an effective treatment.

## 7. Monitoring and adverse effects

- 7.1 What complications or adverse effects can occur from NVP and HG and what are their preventive/management strategies?

Urea and serum electrolyte levels should be checked daily in women requiring intravenous fluids.

/check

Histamine H2 receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors may be used for women developing gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, oesophagitis or gastritis. D

Thiamine supplementation (either oral or intravenous) should be given to all women admitted with prolonged vomiting, especially before administration of dextrose or parenteral nutrition. D

Women admitted with HG should be offered thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin unless there are specific contraindications such as active bleeding. Thromboprophylaxis can be discontinued upon discharge. C

Women with previous or current NVP or HG should consider avoiding iron-containing preparations if these exacerbate the symptoms.

In women requiring intravenous fluids, daily monitoring of fluid and serum electrolyte levels is important to prevent and treat hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia. 29,70

Recurrent intractable vomiting may lead to gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, oesophagitis or gastritis.  Oesophageal  gastroduodenoscopy is safe in pregnancy 71 and indicated if there is haematemesis or severe epigastric pain. A therapeutic trial with a proton pump inhibitor is appropriate for treatment and prevention and is safe in pregnancy. 72

A systematic review 73 concluded that safety data for histamine H2 receptor antagonists were generally reassuring but further studies are needed.

Wernicke's encephalopathy due to vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency classically presents with blurred vision, unsteadiness and confusion/memory problems/drowsiness and on examination there is usually nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, hyporeflexia or areflexia, gait and/or finger-nose ataxia.  In  HG,  the  presentation  tends  to  be  episodic  and  of  slow  onset.  Wernicke's encephalopathy is a potentially fatal but reversible medical emergency. In the context of HG, it is  totally  preventable  and  studies 74,75 have  stressed  the  association  between  Wernicke's encephalopathy and administration of intravenous dextrose and parenteral nutrition. One of these studies 74 reported that complete remission occurred in only 29% and permanent residual impairment was common. The overall pregnancy loss rate including intrauterine deaths and terminations was 48%. 74 Therefore thiamine supplementation is recommended for all women with protracted vomiting.

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 4

Evidence level 1+

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 3

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 3

A retrospective study 76 found that the odds ratio for venous thromboembolism with HG was 2.5 (95% CI 2-3.2). A Canadian study 77 using hospital discharge data found an adjusted odds ratio for deep vein thrombosis of 4.4 (95% CI 2.4-8.4) in women with HG. However, since women with HG are only at markedly increased risk while persistently vomiting, thromboprophylaxis can be discontinued at discharge or when the HG resolves. 78

Oral iron can cause nausea and vomiting. In a Canadian prospective cohort study, 79 two-thirds of 97 women who discontinued iron supplements reported improvement in their severity of NVP .

## 8. Further management

## 8.1 What is the role of the multidisciplinary team?

In women with severe NVP or HG, input may be required from other professionals, such as midwives, nurses, dieticians, pharmacists, endocrinologists, nutritionists and gastroenterologists, and a mental health team, including a psychiatrist.

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 2-

<!-- image -->

There are many facets to severe NVP and HG and a holistic approach to assessment and treatment should be adopted.

Dietetic advice can be very helpful to treat or avoid potentially serious complications. Women requiring  enteral  or  parenteral  feeding  require  input  from  a  gastroenterologist  and  a nutritionist. 80 Advice from other specialists such as a pharmacist and endocrinologist may often be required.

Evidence level 4

Involvement of a mental health team in the woman's care may improve quality of life and the ability to cope with pregnancy. 81 Emotional support and psychological or psychiatric care may be required 27 with targeted interventions specifically designed to treat mental health issues in HG, which are a result of HG rather than a cause. 82-85

Evidence level 2-

## 8.2 When should enteral and parenteral nutrition be considered and what are the risks to the mother and fetus?

When all other medical therapies have failed, enteral or parenteral treatment should be considered with a multidisciplinary approach.

There are no defined criteria for parenteral or enteral feeding. Their effectiveness is not well established. Anecdotally, they can be successful and are often employed as a last resort when all other medical therapy has failed and the only other practical option is termination of the pregnancy. 86,87 Close monitoring of metabolic and electrolyte balance, related complications and nutritional requirements are needed so a multidisciplinary approach can be employed.

Enteral feeding options to consider include nasogastric, nasoduodenal or nasojejunal tubes, or percutaneous  endoscopic  gastrostomy  or  jejunostomy  feeding.  Parenteral  feeding  with  a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC line) is often better tolerated than enteral feeding; however, it carries a higher risk of infection and vascular perforation. 80

There may be resistance to enteral feeding from the patient for cosmetic and psychological reasons or for fear of discomfort; however, it is more effective and safer than parenteral feeding. 88

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2-

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 3

In some women, intragastric feeding by nasogastric or percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube increases the risk of nausea and vomiting. It may be tolerated in the short term but not in protracted HG. 89

In nasojejunal feeding, the tube is inserted endoscopically to the jejunum and feeding can be administered by a continuous infusion. One study 89 showed that although the majority of women improved greatly within 48 hours, ongoing vomiting and retching can dislodge gastric and postpyloric feeding tubes.

Feeding via a percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy, placed under general anaesthetic in the second trimester, 90 has been shown to be an effective, safe and well-tolerated treatment of HG. In the majority of women, the tube is removed after delivery. The risk of early dislodgement is minimised compared with nasoenteric placement. 90 Potential complications of percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy include tube dislodgement, obstruction or migration, cutaneous or intra-abdominal abscesses, fistula formation, pneumatosis, occlusion and intestinal ischaemia.

Total parenteral nutrition is a complex high-risk intervention; however, it may be useful in refractory cases to ensure sufficient calorie intake. It should only be used as a last resort when all other treatments have failed as it is inconvenient, expensive and can be associated with serious complications  such  as  thrombosis,  metabolic  disturbances  and  infection. 27,91 A  single nonrandomised study 92 has shown that total parenteral nutrition was associated with a decreased risk  of  perinatal  morbidity.  A  strict  protocol  with  careful  monitoring  is  essential  when undertaking total parenteral nutrition. 93

## 8.3 When should termination of pregnancy be considered?

## All therapeutic measures should have been tried before offering termination of a wanted pregnancy.

The Hyperemesis Education and Research (HER) Foundation in the USA reports that 10% of pregnancies complicated by HG end in termination in women who would not otherwise have chosen this. 94 Pregnancy Sickness Support in the UK found that many of these women have not been offered  the  full  range  of  treatments  available  and  fewer  than  10%  had  been  offered steroids. 95

Treatment options of antiemetics, corticosteroids, enteral and parenteral feeding, and correction of electrolyte or metabolic disturbances should be considered before deciding that the only option is termination of the pregnancy. 96,97 A psychiatric opinion should also be sought, and the decision for termination needs to be multidisciplinary, with documentation of therapeutic failure if this is the reason for the termination. Women should be offered counselling before and after a decision of pregnancy termination is made.

In a survey 97 of 808 women who terminated their pregnancies secondary to HG, 123 (15.2%) had at least one termination due to HG, and 49 (6.1%) had multiple terminations. Prominent reasons given for the terminations were inability to care for the family and self (66.7%), fear that they or their baby could die (51.2%), or that the baby would be abnormal (22%). In the same survey, women who terminated a pregnancy were more likely to report a negative attitude from their caregiver. Initiation of a prompt and responsive treatment plan may reduce this. 86 Occasionally, HG or its treatment may lead to life-threatening illness and termination of the pregnancy is seen as the only option.

Evidence level 3

Evidence level 2+

Evidence level 4

Evidence level 2-

Evidence level 4

## 9. Discharge and follow-up

## 9.1 What discharge and follow-up arrangements should be implemented?

Women with NVP and HG should have an individualised management plan in place when they are discharged from hospital.

Women with severe NVP or HG who have continued symptoms into the late second or the third trimester should be offered serial scans to monitor fetal growth.

At the time of discharge, it is essential that women are advised to continue with their antiemetics where appropriate and that they know how to access further care if their symptoms and/or signs recur (e.g. persistent vomiting, dehydration or ketonuria). Earlier treatment may reduce the need for hospital admission. Rehydration and a review of antiemetic treatment should ideally be undertaken in an ambulatory daycare setting. 98 Better communication and advice about the safety of antiemetics may enable general practitioners to adequately support women with HG. 95,98

/check

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2-

For some women, checking for ketonuria may identify a problem before vomiting is severe, allowing earlier access for rehydration, 33 but level of ketones should not be relied upon over and above clinical symptoms. 99

Evidence level 2+

Advice about patient support groups (e.g. Pregnancy Sickness Support) should be provided as many women and their partners find this form of support helpful. 100-102

A follow-up appointment for antenatal care is important in women suffering from HG. Psychological and social support should be organised depending upon the clinical and social circumstances.

An observational study 21 has shown that women with HG and low pregnancy weight gain (less than 7 kg during pregnancy) are at an increased risk of preterm delivery (adjusted relative risk 3.0, 95% CI 1.9-4.3) and low birthweight (less than 2500 g; adjusted relative risk 2.8, 95% CI 1.7-4.3).

An Indian study 76 demonstrated that excessive vomiting in pregnancy (defined as vomiting that lasted  beyond  5  months)  was  significantly  (OR  4.48,  95%  CI  1.10-18.28)  associated  with underweight children (in those aged less than 3 years) compared with vomiting lasting less than 5 months. When women with severe HG are considered, it has been shown that those requiring repeated admissions have an 18% incidence of small-for-gestational-age babies and significantly lower birthweights than babies of women with HG and single admissions. 103

## 10. What is the effect of NVP and HG in the postnatal period?

10.1 How should we advise about future pregnancies?

Women with previous HG should be advised that there is a risk of recurrence in future pregnancies.

Early use of lifestyle/dietary modifications and antiemetics that were found to be useful in the index pregnancy is advisable to reduce the risk of NVP and HG in the current pregnancy.

Reported HG recurrence rates vary, from 15.2% in a Norwegian hospital registry study 8 to 81% if using self-reported diagnosis. 9

Evidence level 2+

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 3

A  Canadian  study 104 comparing women with NVP (PUQE score of 13 or above) who took pre-emptive antiemetics before pregnancy or before the onset of symptoms with those who did not, reported lower recurrence rate of HG in the group that took pre-emptive antiemetics. There was also a significant improvement in the PUQE score of NVP severity compared with the previous pregnancy in the pre-emptive group. Women who have experienced severe NVP in a previous pregnancy may benefit from initiating dietary and lifestyle changes and commencing antiemetics before or immediately at the start of symptoms in a subsequent pregnancy. 104

Evidence level 2+

A small randomised study 105 in women with previous NVP demonstrated that pre-emptive treatment with antiemetics resulted in fewer women with moderate to severe NVP .

## 11. What is the effect of NVP and HG on quality of life?

A woman's quality of life can be adversely affected by NVP and HG and practitioners should address the severity of a woman's symptoms in relation to her quality of life and social situation.

Practitioners should assess a woman's mental health status during the pregnancy and postnatally and refer for psychological support if necessary.

Women should be referred to sources of psychosocial support.

Practitioners should validate the woman's physical symptoms and psychological distress.

Women should be advised to rest as required to alleviate symptoms.

NVP has been reported to reduce quality of life, impairing a woman's ability to function on a day-to-day basis, and negatively affects relationships with her partner and family. 81,104,106-117 Women with HG are three to six times more likely than women with NVP to have low quality of life. 22 Persistent  nausea  is  the  symptom  that  most  adversely  affects  quality  of  life. 112,118 Furthermore, causes of stress as a consequence of NVP include lack of understanding and support, inability to eat healthily, grief for loss of normal pregnancy, absence from work, financial pressures, isolation,  inability  to  care  for  family,  others'  belief  that  it  is  psychosomatic  and reluctance of doctors to treat the condition. 24,106,119 Perceived stress positively correlated with NVP and negatively correlated with social support in a cross-sectional study of 243 women. 120 It has been recommended that social support is necessary as an adjunct to treatment and the circle of support should be expanded to include family, friends and healthcare professionals. 121 A cohort study 106 of 648 women found that having support from at least three other persons was protective for NVP .

Clinical  assessment  should  be  considered  for  depression  and  postnatal  depression  with appropriate referral. Depression and poor psychological health were found to be associated with NVP and HG in numerous studies, 82,83,106,107,122-129 but resulted from the disease and were not the cause of HG or NVP . A prospective case-control study 83 of 32 women compared with 41 matched controls found that, compared with controls, women with HG had significantly higher levels of somatisation, depression, anxiety and overall psychological distress even when HG had resolved to mild NVP .

A cohort study 106 of 648 women found that symptoms of major depression are associated with moderate and severe NVP but prior history of depression is not a determinant. 106,130

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Evidence level 2-

| Measures that address NVP, poor social support and depression are warranted throughout pregnancy. 106 A prospective cohort study 109 of 367 women suggests that practitioners could improve their management of NVP by addressing symptoms and life situation. The theory of psychogenic aetiology proposed by Fairweather 131 has been severely criticised for poor methodology and bias. 77,132,133 Studies have failed to find a convincing association between a prior history of psychological poor health and risk of suffering from HG, 83,124,126,129,134-136 and poor mental health is a result of the suffering caused by HG rather than being                                                                           | Evidence level 2+   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| Poor psychological health of women with HG is considered as the demoralisation of suffering from a prolonged, severe chronic illness and in this regard it is similar to mental health problems suffered in other chronic illnesses. 139 The erroneous belief in the psychogenic aetiology of HG is still prevalent among healthcare professionals 101,138-142 and poor attitudes towards women contribute to a worse experience for NVP and HGsufferers. 101,121,139,142 A qualitative study of 19 women 142 and an online survey of 114 women 140,143 found that they struggled to obtain treatment for HG, were dissatisfied with communication during their appointments and found healthcare professionals dismissive and 139 | Evidence level 4    |
| Fatigue is associated with NVP in several studies. 112,116,134,140 Rest, particularly napping, is reported by women to relieve symptoms. 115,118,144 A survey 143 of 114 women conducted by a volunteer from Pregnancy Sickness Support found that rest was noted by the majority of respondents with HG as being the only effective management strategy aside from antiemetics. Any kind of sensory stimulation can trigger symptoms, so complete removal from sources of stimulation may be                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Evidence level 2-   |

## 12. Recommendations for future research

- Aetiology of NVP and HG.
- NVP and HG in relation to pregnancy, birth, and long-term outcomes in mother and baby.
- Safety of medication used in NVP and HG.

## 13. Auditable topics

- Women with mild NVP should be managed in the community with antiemetics (100%).
- Metoclopramide should not be used as a first-line antiemetic (100%).
- Urea and serum electrolyte levels should be checked daily in women with HG requiring intravenous fluids (100%).
- Thiamine supplementation should be given to all women admitted with prolonged vomiting (100%).
- Women  with  HG  who  are  admitted to hospital should receive thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin, unless there are contraindications (100%).
- Women with severe NVP or HG who have symptoms extending into the late second trimester or beyond should have ultrasound scans to assess fetal growth (100%).

## 14. Useful links and support groups

- Hyperemesis Education and Research (HER) Foundation [http://www.helpher.org].
- Motherisk [http://www.motherisk.org/women/index.jsp].
- Pregnancy Sickness Support [http://www.pregnancysicknesssupport.org.uk].
- UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS):
- -For patients: bumps (best use of medicines in pregnancy). Treating nausea and vomiting in pregnancy [http://www.medicinesinpregnancy.org/Medicine--pregnancy/NV/].
- -For professionals: UKTIS. Treatment of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy [http://www.medicinesinpregnancy.org/bumps/monographs/TREATMENT-OF-NAUSEA-AND-VOMITINGIN-PREGNANCY/].

## References

1. Einarson TR, Piwko C, Koren G. Quantifying the global rates of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a meta-analysis. J Popul Ther Clin Pharmacol 2013;20:e171-83.
2. Lacasse A, Lagoutte A, Ferreira E, Bérard A. Metoclopramide and  diphenhydramine  in  the  treatment  of  hyperemesis gravidarum: effectiveness and predictors of rehospitalisation. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2009;143:43-9.
3. Gazmararian  JA,  Petersen  R,  Jamieson  DJ,  Schild  L, Adams MM, Deshpande AD, et al. Hospitalizations during pregnancy among managed care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 2002;100:94-100.
4. Atanackovic G, Wolpin J, Koren G. Determinants of the need for  hospital  care  among  women  with  nausea  and vomiting of pregnancy. Clin Invest Med 2001;24:90-3.
5. Matthews A, Dowswell T, Haas DM, Doyle M, O'Mathúna DP . Interventions for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;(9):CD007575.
6. Eliakim R, Abulafia O, Sherer DM. Hyperemesis gravidarum: a current review. Am J Perinatol 2000;17:207-18.
7. Miller F. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: the problem of perception-is it  really  a  disease? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S182-3.
8. Trogstad LI, Stoltenberg C, Magnus P , Skjærven R, Irgens LM.  Recurrence  risk  in  hyperemesis  gravidarum. BJOG 2005;112:1641-5.
9. Fejzo  MS,  Jalil  S,  MacGibbon  K,  Opper  N,  Romero  R, Goodwin  TM,  et  al.  Recurrence  risk  of  hyperemesis gravidarum [abstract 445]. Reproductive Sciences 2010; 17:191A-192A.
10. Buckwalter JG, Simpson SW . Psychological factors in the etiology and treatment of severe nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S210-4.
11. O'Brien B, Relyea MJ. Use of indigenous explanations and remedies  to  further  understand  nausea  and  vomiting during pregnancy. Health Care Women Int 1999;20:49-61.
12. Einarson A, Maltepe C, Boskovic R, Koren G. Treatment of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: an updated algorithm. Can Fam Physician 2007;53:2109-11.
13. Louik C, Hernandez-Diaz S, Werler MM, Mitchell AA. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: maternal characteristics and risk factors. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2006;20:270-8.
14. Gadsby  R,  Barnie-Adshead  AM,  Jagger  C.  A  prospective study of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Br J Gen Pract 1993;43:245-8 [Erratum appears in Br J Gen Pract 1993;43:325].
15. Rhodes VA, McDaniel RW . The Index of Nausea, Vomiting, and Retching: a new format of the lndex of Nausea and Vomiting. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:889-94.
16. Rhodes  VA,  Watson  PM,  Johnson  MH.  Development  of reliable and valid measures of nausea and vomiting. Cancer Nurs 1984;7:33-41.
17. Koren  G,  Boskovic  R,  Hard  M,  Maltepe  C,  Navioz  Y, Einarson A. Motherisk-PUQE (pregnancy-unique quantifi  cation of emesis and nausea) scoring system for nausea and vomiting  of  pregnancy. Am  J  Obstet  Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S228-31.
18. Koren G, Piwko C, Ahn E, Boskovic R, Maltepe C, Einarson A, et al. Validation studies of the Pregnancy UniqueQuantification of Emesis (PUQE) scores. J Obstet Gynaecol 2005;25:241-4.
19. Lacasse A, Rey E, Ferreira E, Morin C, Bérard A. Validity of a modified Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis and Nausea (PUQE) scoring index to assess severity of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Am  J Obstet Gynecol 2008;198:71.e1-7.
20. Ebrahimi N, Maltepe C, Bournissen FG, Koren G. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: using the 24-hour Pregnancy-Unique  Quantification  of  Emesis  (PUQE-24) scale. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2009;31:803-7.
21. Dodds L, Fell DB, Joseph KS, Allen VM, Butler B. Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 2006;107:285-92.
22. Goodwin TM, Montoro M, Mestman JH. Transient hyperthyroidism  and  hyperemesis  gravidarum:  clinical aspects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:648-52.
23. Rotman  P ,  Hassin  D,  Mouallem  M,  Barkai  G,  Farfel  Z. Wernicke's  encephalopathy  in  hyperemesis  gravidarum: association  with  abnormal  liver  function. Isr  J  Med  Sci 1994;30:225-8.
24. Davis M. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: an evidencebased review. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs 2004;18:312-28.
25. Koch KL. Gastrointestinal factors in nausea and vomiting of  pregnancy. Am  J  Obstet  Gynecol 2002;186  Suppl  2: S198-203.
26. Quinlan JD, Hill DA. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Am Fam Physician 2003;68:121-8.
27. Jueckstock  JK,  Kaestner  R,  Mylonas  I.  Managing  hyperemesis  gravidarum:  a  multimodal  challenge. BMC  Med 2010;8:46.
28. Li L, Li L, Zhou X, Xiao S, Gu H, Zhang G. Helicobacter pylori infection  is  associated  with  an  increased  risk  of hyperemesis gravidarum: a meta-analysis. Gastroenterol Res Pract 2015;2015:278905.
29. Jarvis  S,  Nelson-Piercy  C.  Management  of  nausea  and vomiting in pregnancy. BMJ 2011;342:d3606.
30. Erick M. Hyperemesis gravidarum: a case of starvation and altered sensorium gestosis (ASG). Med Hypotheses 2014;82:572-80.
31. Lombardi DG, Istwan NB, Rhea DJ, O'Brien JM, Barton JR. Measuring  outpatient  outcomes  of  emesis  and  nausea management in pregnant women. Manag Care 2004;13: 48-52.

32. McCarthy FP , Murphy A, Khashan AS, McElroy B, Spillane N, Marchocki  Z,  et  al.  Day  care  compared  with  inpatient management  of  nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy:  a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:743-8.
33. Khan TN, Karpate S, Shehmar M. Hyperemesis day centre audit [E-poster EP13.25]. BJOG 2013;120 Suppl 1:527.
34. Mazzotta P , Magee LA. A risk-benefit assessment of pharma  cological and nonpharmacological treatments for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Drugs 2000;59:781-800.
35. Magee LA, Mazzotta P , Koren G. Evidence-based view of safety  and  effectiveness  of  pharmacologic  therapy  for nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy  (NVP). Am J  Obstet Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S256-61.
36. Gill SK, Einarson A. The safety of drugs for the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2007;6:685-94.
37. Koren  G,  Clark  S,  Hankins  GD,  Caritis  SN,  Umans  JG, Miodovnik M, et al. Maternal safety of the delayed-release doxylamine and pyridoxine combination for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy; a randomized placebo controlled trial. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2015;15:59.
38. Pasternak B, Svanström H, Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Melbye M, Hviid A. Metoclopramide in pregnancy and risk of major congenital  malformations  and  fetal  death. JAMA 2013; 310:1601-11.
39. European Medicines Agency. European Medicines Agency recommends  changes  to  the  use  of  metoclopramide. 20  December  2013.  EMA/13239/2014  Corr.  1.  London: EMA; 2013 [http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en\_GB/ document\_library/Referrals\_document/Metoclopramide\_31 /WC500146610.pdf]. Accessed 2016 Feb 24.
40. Regan  LA,  Hoffman  RS,  Nelson  LS.  Slower  infusion  of metoclopramide decreases the rate of akathisia. Am J Emerg Med 2009;27:475-80.
41. Pasternak  B,  Svanström  H,  Hviid  A.  Ondansetron  in pregnancy and risk of adverse fetal outcomes. N Engl J Med 2013;368:814-23.
42. Anderka M, Mitchell AA, Louik C, Werler MM, Hernández-Diaz S, Rasmussen SA; National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Medications used to treat nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and the risk of selected birth defects. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2012;94:22-30.
43. Danielsson B, Wikner BN, Källén B. Use of ondansetron during  pregnancy  and  congenital  malformations  in  the infant. Reprod Toxicol 2014;50:134-7.
44. Oliveira LG, Capp SM, You WB, Riffenburgh RH, Carstairs SD. Ondansetron compared with doxylamine and pyridoxine  for  treatment  of  nausea  in  pregnancy:  a randomized  controlled  trial. Obstet  Gynecol 2014;124: 735-42.
45. Abas  MN,  Tan  PC,  Azmi  N,  Omar  SZ.  Ondansetron compared with metoclopramide for hyperemesis gravidarum: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:1272-9.
46. Kashifard M, Basirat Z, Kashifard M, Golsorkhtabar-Amiri M, Moghaddamnia  A.  Ondansetrone  or  metoclopromide? Which is  more  effective  in  severe  nausea  and  vomiting of  pregnancy?  A  randomized  trial  double-blind  study. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2013;40:127-30.
47. Schuster K, Bailey LB, Dimperio D, Mahan CS. Morning sickness  and  vitamin  B6  status  of  pregnant  women. Hum Nutr Clin Nutr 1985;39:75-9.
48. Tan PC, Yow CM, Omar SZ. A placebo-controlled trial of oral pyridoxine  in  hyperemesis  gravidarum. Gynecol  Obstet Invest 2009;67:151-7.
49. Pope E, Maltepe C, Koren G. Comparing pyridoxine and doxylamine  succinate-pyridoxine  HCl  for  nausea  and vomiting of pregnancy: A matched, controlled cohort study. J Clin Pharmacol 2015;55:809-14.
50. Taylor R. Successful management of hyperemesis gravidarum using steroid therapy. QJM 1996;89:103-7.
51. Nelson-Piercy  C,  Fayers  P ,  de  Swiet  M.  Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of corticosteroids for the  treatment  of  hyperemesis  gravidarum. BJOG 2001; 108:9-15.
52. Safari HR, Fassett MJ, Souter IC, Alsulyman OM, Goodwin TM. The efficacy of methylprednisolone in the treatment  of  hyperemesis  gravidarum:  a  randomized, double-blind, controlled study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998; 179:921-4.
53. Yost NP , McIntire DD, Wians FH Jr, Ramin SM, Balko JA, Leveno  KJ.  A  randomized,  placebo-controlled  trial  of corticosteroids for hyperemesis due to pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102:1250-4.
54. Bondok RS, El Sharnouby NM, Eid HE, Abd Elmaksoud AM. Pulsed  steroid  therapy  is  an  effective  treatment  for intractable hyperemesis gravidarum. Crit Care  Med 2006;34:2781-3.
55. Ditto A, Morgante G, la Marca A, De Leo V . Evaluation of treatment  of  hyperemesis  gravidarum  using  parenteral fluid  with  or  without  diazepam.  A  randomized  study. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1999;48:232-6.
56. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Intravenous  fluid  therapy  in  adults  in  hospital .  NICE clinical guideline 174. [Manchester]: NICE; 2013.
57. Ding M, Leach M, Bradley H. The effectiveness and safety of ginger  for  pregnancy-induced  nausea  and  vomiting:  a systematic review. Women Birth 2013;26:e26-30.
58. Dante  G,  Pedrielli  G,  Annessi  E,  Facchinetti  F.  Herb remedies during pregnancy: a systematic review of controlled  clinical  trials. J  Matern  Fetal  Neonatal  Med 2013;26:306-12.
59. Thomson  M,  Corbin  R,  Leung  L.  Effects  of  ginger  for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy: a meta-analysis. J Am Board Fam Med 2014;27:115-22.
60. Mohammadbeigi R, Shahgeibi S, Soufizadeh N, Rezaiie M, Farhadifar F. Comparing  the effects of ginger  and metoclopramide on the treatment of pregnancy nausea. Pak J Biol Sci 2011;14:817-20.
61. Basirat Z, Moghadamnia AA, Kashifard M, Sarifi-Razavi A. The effect of ginger biscuit on nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Acta Med Iran 2009;47:51-6.
62. Portnoi G, Chng LA, Karimi-Tabesh L, Koren G, Tan MP , Einarson A. Prospective comparative study of the safety and effectiveness  of  ginger  for  the  treatment  of  nausea  and vomiting  in  pregnancy. Am J Obstet  Gynecol 2003;189: 1374-7.
63. Boone SA, Shields KM. Treating pregnancy-related nausea and  vomiting  with  ginger. Ann Pharmacother 2005;39: 1710-3.
64. Tiran  D.  Ginger  to  reduce  nausea  and  vomiting  during pregnancy: evidence of effectiveness is not the same as proof of safety. Complement Ther Clin Pract 2012;18:22-5.
65. Smith C, Crowther C, Beilby J. Pregnancy outcome following women's participation in a randomised controlled trial of acupuncture to treat nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Complement Ther Med 2002;10:78-83.
66. Helmreich  RJ, Shiao SY, Dune  LS. Meta-analysis of acustimulation effects on nausea and vomiting in pregnant women. Explore (NY) 2006;2:412-21.
67. Belluomini  J,  Litt  RC,  Lee  KA,  Katz  M.  Acupressure  for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a randomized, blinded study. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:245-8.
68. Lee EJ, Frazier SK. The efficacy of acupressure for symptom management: a systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011;42:589-603.
69. McCormack  D.  Hypnosis  for  hyperemesis  gravidarum. J Obstet Gynaecol 2010;30:647-53.

70. Bergin PS, Harvey P . Wernicke's encephalopathy and central pontine myelinolysis associated with hyperemesis gravidarum. BMJ 1992;305:517-8.
71. Debby A, Golan A, Sadan O, Glezerman M, Shirin H. Clinical utility  of  esophagogastroduodenoscopy  in  the  management of recurrent and intractable vomiting in pregnancy. J Reprod Med 2008;53:347-51.
72. Gill SK, O'Brien L, Einarson TR, Koren G. The safety of proton  pump  inhibitors  (PPIs)  in  pregnancy:  a  metaanalysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:1541-5.
73. Gilboa  SM,  Ailes  EC,  Rai  RP ,  Anderson  JA,  Honein  MA. Antihistamines and birth defects: a systematic review of the literature. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2014;13:1667-98.
74. Chiossi  G,  Neri  I,  Cavazzuti  M,  Basso  G,  Facchinetti  F. Hyperemesis gravidarum complicated by Wernicke encephalopathy: background, case report, and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2006;61:255-68.
75. Togay-I ş ikay C, Yi ğ it A, Mutluer N. Wernicke's encephalopathy  due  to  hyperemesis  gravidarum:  an under-recognised condition. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2001;41:453-6.
76. Sanghvi U, Thankappan KR, Sarma PS, Sali N. Assessing potential risk factors for child malnutrition in rural Kerala, India. J Trop Pediatr 2001;47:350-5.
77. Liu S, Rouleau J, Joseph KS, Sauve R, Liston RM, Young D, et al.; Maternal Health Study Group of the Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System. Epidemiology of pregnancy-associated venous  thromboembolism:  a  population-based  study  in Canada. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2009;31:611-20.
78. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Reducing the Risk of Thrombosis and Embolism During Pregnancy and the Puerperium . Green-top Guideline No. 37a. London: RCOG; 2009.
79. Gill SK, Maltepe  C, Koren  G.  The  effectiveness of discontinuing iron-containing prenatal multivitamins on reducing the severity of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol 2009;29:13-6.
80. Goodwin TM. Hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2008;35:401-17, viii.
81. Mazzotta  P ,  Stewart  DE,  Koren  G,  Magee  LA.  Factors associated with elective termination of pregnancy among Canadian and American women with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 2001;22:7-12.
82. Magtira A, Schoenberg FP , MacGibbon K, Tabsh K, Fejzo MS. Psychiatric factors do not affect recurrence risk of hyperemesis  gravidarum. J  Obstet  Gynaecol  Res 2015; 41:512-6.
83. McCormack D, Scott-Heyes G, McCusker CG. The impact of hyperemesis gravidarum on maternal mental health and maternal-fetal attachment. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 2011;32:79-87.
84. Loveland  Cook  CA,  Flick  LH,  Homan  SM,  Campbell  C, McSweeney M, Gallagher ME. Posttraumatic stress disorder in  pregnancy:  prevalence,  risk  factors,  and  treatment. Obstet Gynecol 2004;103:710-7.
85. Christodoulou-Smith J, Gold JI, Romero R, Goodwin TM, MacGibbon  KW ,  Mullin  PM,  et  al.  Posttraumatic  stress symptoms following pregnancy complicated by hyperemesis  gravidarum. J  Matern  Fetal  Neonatal  Med 2011;24:1307-11.
86. Tan PC, Omar SZ. Contemporary approaches to hyperemesis during pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2011;23:87-93.
87. Stokke G, Gjelsvik BL, Flaatten KT, Birkeland E, Flaatten H, Trovik J. Hyperemesis gravidarum, nutritional treatment by nasogastric tube feeding: a 10-year retrospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2015;94:359-67.
88. Holmgren  C,  Aagaard-Tillery  KM,  Silver  RM,  Porter  TF, Varner  M.  Hyperemesis  in  pregnancy:  an  evaluation  of

treatment strategies with maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;198:56.e1-56.e4.

89. Vaisman  N,  Kaidar  R,  Levin  I,  Lessing  JB.  Nasojejunal feeding in hyperemesis gravidarum-a preliminary study. Clin Nutr 2004;23:53-7.
90. Saha  S,  Loranger  D,  Pricolo  V ,  Degli-Esposti  S.  Feeding jejunostomy  for  the  treatment  of  severe  hyperemesis gravidarum: a case series. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2009;33:529-34.
91. Holmgren  C,  Aagaard-Tillery  KM,  Silver  RM,  Porter  TF, Varner  M.  Hyperemesis  in  pregnancy:  an  evaluation  of treatment strategies with maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;198:56.e1-4.
92. Peled  Y,  Melamed  N,  Hiersch  L,  Pardo  J,  Wiznitzer  A, Yogev Y. The impact of total parenteral nutrition support on  pregnancy  outcome  in  women  with  hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2014;27:1146-50.
93. Neill  AM,  Nelson-Piercy  C.  Hyperemesis  gravidarum. The Obstetrician &amp; Gynaecologist 2003;5:204-7.
94. Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation. Thera  peutic Abortion [http://www.helpher.org/hyperemesisgravidarum/treatments/abortion.php]. Accessed 2016 Mar 1.
95. Pregnancy Sickness Support, British Pregnancy Advisory Service. I  could  not  survive  another  day.  Improving treatment  and  tackling  stigma:  lessons  from  women's experience  of  abortion  for  severe  pregnancy  sickness . [Par]: PSS; 2015.
96. Al-Ozairi  E,  Waugh  JJ,  Taylor  R.  Termination  is  not  the treatment of choice for severe hyperemesis gravidarum: successful management using prednisolone. Obstet Med 2009;2:34-7.
97. Poursharif B, Korst LM, MacGibbon  KW , Fejzo MS, Romero R, Goodwin TM. Elective pregnancy termination in a large cohort of women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Contraception 2007;76:451-5.
98. Power Z, Thomson AM, Waterman H. Understanding the stigma  of  hyperemesis  gravidarum:  qualitative  findings from an action research study. Birth 2010;37:237-44.
99. Niemeijer MN, Grooten IJ, Vos N, Bais JM, van der Post JA, Mol  BW , et al.  Diagnostic  markers  for  hyperemesis gravidarum: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;211:150.e1-15.
100. Pregnancy Sickness Support [http://www.pregnancy sicknesssupport.org.uk/]. Accessed 2016 Mar 1.
101. Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation [http://www.helpher.org/]. Accessed 2016 Mar 1.
102. Saleh  A,  Sykes  C.  The  impact  of  online  information  on health related quality of life amongst women with nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. MIDIRS Midwifery Digest 2014;24:179-85.
103. Godsey  RK,  Newman  RB.  Hyperemesis  gravidarum.  A comparison of single and multiple admissions. J Reprod Med 1991;36:287-90.
104. Koren G, Maltepe C. Pre-emptive therapy for severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. J Obstet Gynaecol 2004;24:530-3.
105. Maltepe C, Koren G. Preemptive treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: results of a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol Int 2013;2013:809787.
106. Kramer J, Bowen A, Stewart N, Muhajarine N. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: prevalence, severity and relation to psychosocial  health. MCN  Am  J  Matern  Child  Nurs 2013;38:21-7.
107. O'Brien B, Evans M, White-McDonald E. Isolation from 'being alive': coping with severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Nurs Res 2002;51:302-8.
108. Ezberci İ ,  Güven  ES,  Üstüner  I, Ş ahin  FK,  Hocao ğ lu  Ç. Disability and psychiatric symptoms  in  hyperemesis gravidarum patients. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2014;289:55-60.

109. Lacasse A, Rey E, Ferreira E, Morin C, Bérard A. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: what about quality of life? BJOG 2008;115:1484-93.
110. Attard  CL,  Kohli  MA,  Coleman  S,  Bradley  C,  Hux  M, Atanackovic  G,  et  al.  The  burden  of  illness  of  severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy in the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S220-7.
111. Munch S. Women's experiences with a pregnancy complication: causal explanations of hyperemesis gravidarum. Soc Work Health Care 2002;36:59-75.
112. Magee LA, Chandra K, Mazzotta P , Stewart D, Koren G, Guyatt  GH.  Development  of  a  health-related  quality  of life  instrument  for  nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186 Suppl 2:S232-8.
113. Munch S, Korst LM, Hernandez GD, Romero R, Goodwin TM. Health-related quality of life in women with nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy:  the  importance  of psychosocial context. J Perinatol 2011;31:10-20.
114. Smith C, Crowther C, Beilby J, Dandeaux J. The impact of nausea  and  vomiting  on  women:  a  burden  of  early pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2000;40:397-401.
115. O'Brien B, Naber S. Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: effects on the quality of women's lives. Birth 1992;19:138-43.
116. Wood H, McKellar LV , Lightbody M. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: blooming or bloomin' awful? A review of the literature. Women Birth 2013;26:100-4.
117. Clark S, Hughes B, McDonald SS. The impact of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy on quality of life: report of a national consumer  survey  and  recommendations  for  improving care. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2013;68 Suppl 1:S1-10.
118. Chandra K, Magee L, Einarson A, Koren G. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: results of a survey that identified interventions used by women to alleviate their symptoms. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 2003;24:71-5.
119. Dørheim  SK,  Bjorvatn  B,  Eberhard-Gran  M.  Sick  leave during pregnancy: a longitudinal study of rates and risk factors in a Norwegian population. BJOG 2013;120:521-30.
120. Chou FH, Kuo SH, Wang RH. A longitudinal study of nausea and vomiting, fatigue and perceived stress in, and social support for, pregnant women through the three trimesters. Kaohsiung J Med Sci 2008;24:306-14.
121. Soltani H, Taylor GM. Changing attitudes and perceptions to hyperemesis gravidarum. RCM Midwives 2003;6:520-4.
122. McCarthy  FP ,  Khashan  AS,  North  RA,  Moss-Morris  R, Baker PN, Dekker G, et al.; SCOPE consortium. A prospective cohort study investigating associations between hyperemesis gravidarum  and  cognitive,  behavioural  and  emotional well-being in pregnancy. PLoS One 2011;6:e27678.
123. Swallow BL, Lindow SW , Masson EA, Hay DM. Psychological health in early pregnancy: relationship with nausea and vomiting. J Obstet Gynaecol 2004;24:28-32.
124. Chou  FH,  Lin  LL,  Cooney  AT,  Walker  LO,  Riggs  MW . Psychosocial factors related to nausea, vomiting, and fatigue in early pregnancy. J Nurs Scholarsh 2003;35:119-25.
125. Tan PC, Vani S, Lim BK, Omar SZ. Anxiety and depression in hyperemesis gravidarum: prevalence, risk factors and correlation  with  clinical  severity. Eur  J  Obstet  Gynecol Reprod Biol 2010;149:153-8.
126. Bozzo P , Einarson TR, Koren G, Einarson A. Nausea and vomiting  of  pregnancy  (NVP)  and  depression:  cause  or effect? Clin Invest Med 2011;34:E245-8.
127. Kuo  SH,  Yang  YH,  Wang  RH,  Chan  TF,  Chou  FH. Relationships between leptin, hCG, cortisol, and psychosocial stress and nausea and vomiting throughout pregnancy. Biol Res Nurs 2010;12:20-7.
128. Chou  FH,  Avant  KC,  Kuo  SH,  Fetzer  SJ.  Relationships between  nausea  and  vomiting,  perceived  stress,  social support, pregnancy planning, and psychosocial adaptation in a sample of mothers: a questionnaire survey. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:1185-91.
129. Fejzo MS, MacGibbon K. Hyperemesis gravidarum: it is time to  put  an  end  to  the  misguided  theory  of  a  psychiatric etiology. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2012;34:699-700.
130. Aksoy H, Aksoy Ü, Karada ğ Ö İ , Hacimusalar Y, Açmaz G, Aykut G, et al. Depression levels in patients with hyperemesis gravidarum: a prospective case-control study. Springerplus 2015;4:34.
131. Fairweather  DV .  Nausea  and  vomiting  in  pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1968;102:135-75.
132. Munch S. Chicken or the egg? The biological-psychological controversy surrounding hyperemesis gravidarum. Soc Sci Med 2002;55:1267-78.
133. Swallow BL. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: psychological and social aspects [PhD  dissertation]. Lincoln: University of Lincoln; 2009.
134. D'Orazio  LM,  Meyerowitz  BE,  Korst  LM,  Romero  R, Goodwin TM. Evidence against a link between hyperemesis gravidarum and personality characteristics from an ethnically diverse sample of pregnant women: a pilot study. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2011;20:137-44.
135. Bozzo  P ,  Koren  G,  Nava-Ocampo  AA,  Einarson  A.  The incidence of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP): a comparison  between  depressed  women  treated  with antidepressants and non-depressed women. Clin Invest Med 2006;29:347-50.
136. Simpson SW , Goodwin TM, Robins SB, Rizzo AA, Howes RA, Buckwalter DK, et al. Psychological factors and hyperemesis gravidarum. J  Womens  Health  Gend  Based  Med 2001; 10:471-7.
137. Kim DR, Connolly KR, Cristancho P , Zappone M, Weinrieb RM. Psychiatric consultation of patients with hyperemesis gravidarum. Arch Womens Ment Health 2009;12:61-7.
138. Tan PC, Zaidi SN, Azmi N, Omar SZ, Khong SY. Depression, anxiety, stress and hyperemesis gravidarum: temporal and case controlled correlates. PLoS One 2014;9:e92036.
139. Poursharif B, Korst LM, Fejzo MS, MacGibbon  KW , Romero  R,  Goodwin  TM.  The  psychosocial  burden  of hyperemesis gravidarum. J Perinatol 2008;28:176-81.
140. O'Hara  ME.  Survey  of  HCP  Attitudes  Responses:  Form Responses [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key =0AidjJL7Em3TKdGdRTHpkdHpqVXZ1c2JQaVNtWFFXcGc &amp;output=html]. Accessed 2016 Feb 24.
141. Locock L, Alexander J, Rozmovits L. Women's responses to nausea  and  vomiting  in  pregnancy. Midwifery 2008; 24:143-52.
142. Sykes C, Swallow B, Gadsby R, Barnie-Adshead A, Dean C, Moran  E,  et  al.  Seeking  medical  help  for  nausea  and vomiting  in  pregnancy  and  hyperemesis  gravidarum  in primary care. MIDIRS Midwifery Digest 2013;23:321-6.
143. O'Hara ME. Women's experience of hyperemesis gravi  darum: results of self reported online surveys [http://www.pregnancysicknesssupport.org.uk/documents/ HCPconferenceslides/womens-experience-2013-MOH.pdf]. Accessed 2016 Feb 24.
144. O'Brien B, Relyea J, Lidstone T. Diary reports of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Clin Nurs Res 1997;6:239-52.

## Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels

Clinical guidelines are: 'systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions'. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development). These recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.

The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.

## Classification of evidence levels

- 1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
- 1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of bias
- 1Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
- 2++ High-quality systematic reviews of casecontrol or cohort studies or high-quality case-control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that the relationship is causal
- 2+ Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
- 2Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal
- 3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
- 4 Expert opinion

## Grades of recommendations

<!-- image -->

At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population; or A systematic review of randomised controlled trials or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results

- A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+ B
- A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results;  or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++ C
- Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+ D

<!-- image -->

## Good practice point

<!-- image -->

- /check

Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group

## Appendix II: Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) index 20

Total score is sum of replies to each of the three questions. PUQE-24 score: Mild ≤ 6; Moderate = 7-12; Severe = 13-15.

| Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system                                                                      | Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system   | Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system   | Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system   | Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system   | Motherisk PUQE-24 scoring system   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| In the last 24 hours, for how long have you felt nauseated or sick to your stomach?                   | Not at all (1)                     | 1 hour or less (2)                 | 2-3 hours (3)                      | 4-6 hours (4)                      | More than 6 hours (5)              |
| In the last 24 hours have you vomited or thrown up?                                                   | 7 or more times (5)                | 5-6 times (4)                      | 3-4 times (3)                      | 1-2 times (2)                      | I did not throw up (1)             |
| In the last 24 hours how many times have you had retching or dry heaves without bringing anything up? | No time (1)                        | 1-2 times (2)                      | 3-4 times (3)                      | 5-6 times (4)                      | 7 or more times (5)                |

PUQE-24 score: Mild ≤ 6; Moderate = 7-12; Severe = 13-15.

How many hours have you slept out of 24 hours? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

On a scale of 0 to 10, how would you rate your wellbeing?

Why? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

0 (worst possible) → 10 (the best you felt before pregnancy)

Can you tell me what causes you to feel that way? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Appendix III: Recommended antiemetic therapies and dosages

| First line   | ● ● ● ●   | Cyclizine 50 mg PO, IM or IV 8 hourly Prochlorperazine 5-10 mg 6-8 hourly PO; 12.5 mg 8 hourly IM/IV; 25 mg PR daily Promethazine 12.5-25 mg 4-8 hourly PO, IM, IV or PR Chlorpromazine 10-25 mg 4-6 hourly PO, IV or IM; or 50-100 mg 6-8 hourly PR   |
|--------------|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Second line  | ● ● ●     | Metoclopramide 5-10 mg 8 hourly PO, IV or IM (maximum 5 days' duration) Domperidone 10 mg 8 hourly PO; 30-60 mg 8 hourly PR Ondansetron 4-8 mg 6-8 hourly PO; 8 mg over 15 minutes 12 hourly IV                                                        |
| Third line   | ●         | Corticosteroids: hydrocortisone 100 mg twice daily IV and once clinical improvement occurs, convert to prednisolone 40-50 mg daily PO, with the dose gradually tapered until the lowest maintenance dose that controls the symptoms is reached         |

IM intramuscular; IV intravenous; PO by mouth; PR by rectum.

## Appendix IV: Treatment algorithm for NVP and HG

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The review process will commence in 2019, unless otherwise indicated.

## DISCLAIMER

The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.

This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient's case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.