## PART IV

## DIRECTIVE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATE  POLICY

36. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, 'the State' has the same meaning as in Part III.

37. The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these  principles  in  making  laws.

38. 1 [(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it  may  a  social  order  in  which  justice,  social,  economic and  political,  shall  inform  all  the  institutions  of  the national  life.

2 [(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the  inequalities  in  income,  and  endeavour  to  eliminate inequalities  in  status,  facilities  and  opportunities,  not only  amongst  individuals  but  also  amongst  groups  of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.]

39. The  State  shall,  in  particular,  direct  its  policy towards securing-

( a ) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood;

( b ) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;

( c ) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;

( d ) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;

1 Art.  38  renumbered as cl. (1)  thereof  by  the  Constitution  (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act,  1978,  s.  9  (w.e.f.  20-6-1979).

2 Ins.  by  s.  9, ibid. (w.e.f  20-6-1979).

Definition.

Application  of  the principles contained  in  this Part.

State  to  secure  a social  order  for the  promotion  of welfare  of  the people.

Certain  principles of  policy  to  be followed  by  the State.

Equal  justice  and free  legal  aid.

Organisation  of village  panchayats.

Right  to  work,  to education  and  to

public  assistance in  certain  cases.

Provision  for  just and  humane

conditions  of  work and  maternity

relief.

Living  wage,  etc., for  workers.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( e )  that  the  health  and  strength  of  workers,  men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;

1 [( f )  that  children  are  given  opportunities  and facilities  to  develop  in  a  healthy  manner  and  in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and  youth  are  protected  against  exploitation  and against  moral  and  material  abandonment.]

2 [ 39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal  system  promotes  justice,  on  a  basis  of  equal opportunity,  and  shall,  in  particular,  provide  free  legal aid,  by  suitable  legislation  or  schemes  or  in  any  other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.]

40. The  State  shall  take  steps  to  organise  village panchayats  and  endow  them  with  such  powers  and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing  the  right  to  work,  to  education  and  to  public assistance  in  cases  of  unemployment,  old  age,  sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

42. The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

43. The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a  living  wage,  conditions  of  work  ensuring  a  decent

1 Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. ( f )  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

2 Ins.  by  s.  8, ibid. (w.e.f.    3-1-1977).

( Part IV. -Directive Principles of State Policy. -Arts. 43-48 A .)

standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and  cultural  opportunities  and,  in  particular,  the  State shall  endeavour  to  promote  cottage  industries  on  an individual  or  co-operative  basis  in  rural  areas.

1 [ 43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers in  the  management  of  undertakings,  establishments  or other  organisations  engaged  in  any  industry.]

44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

* [ 45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period  of  ten  years  from  the  commencement  of  this Constitution,  for  free  and  compulsory  education  for  all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.]

46. The  State  shall  promote  with  special  care  the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and  the  Scheduled  Tribes,  and  shall  protect  them  from social  injustice  and  all  forms  of  exploitation.

47. The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement  of  public  health  as  among  its  primary duties  and,  in  particular,  the  State  shall  endeavour  to bring  about  prohibition  of  the  consumption  except  for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which  are  injurious  to  health.

48. The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and  animal  husbandry  on  modern  and  scientific  lines and  shall,  in  particular,  take  steps  for  preserving  and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Participation  of workers  in management  of industries.

Uniform  civil  code for  the  citizens.

Provision  for  free and  compulsory education  for children.

Promotion  of educational  and economic  interests of  Scheduled Castes,  Scheduled Tribes  and  other weaker  sections.

Duty  of  the  State to  raise  the  level of  nutrition  and the  standard  of living  and  to improve  public health.

Organisation  of agriculture  and animal  husbandry.

1 Ins.  by  the  Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). * Art.  45  shall  stand  substituted  by  the  Constitution  (Eighty-sixth  Amendment)  Act, 2002, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on) as-

'45. Provision  for  early  childhood  care  and  education  to  children  below  the age of six years .-The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for  all  children  until  they  complete the age of six years.'.

Protection  and improvement  of environment  and safeguarding  of forests  and  wild life.

Protection  of monuments  and places  and  objects of  national importance.

Separation  of judiciary  from executive.

Promotion  of international  peace and  security.

## ( Part IV. -Directive Principles of State Policy. -Arts. 48 A -51.)

1 [ 48A. The  State  shall  endeavour  to  protect  and improve  the  environment  and  to  safeguard  the  forests and wild life of the country.]

49. It  shall  be  the  obligation  of  the  State  to  protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest,   2 [declared by or under law made by Parliament] to  be  of  national  importance,  from  spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

50. The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.

51. The  State  shall  endeavour  to-

- ( a )  promote international peace and security;

( b ) maintain just and honourable relations between nations;

( c )  foster  respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with one another; and

( d ) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

1 Ins.  by  the  Constitution  (Forty-second  Amendment)  Act,  1976,  s.  10  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

2 Subs.  by  the  Constitution  (Seventh  Amendment)  Act,  1956,  s.  27,  for  'declared  by Parliament by law'.

## 1 [ PART IVA

## FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES

51A. It  shall  be  the  duty of every citizen of India-

( a )  to  abide  by  the  Constitution  and  respect  its ideals  and  institutions,  the  National  Flag  and  the National Anthem;

( b )  to  cherish  and  follow  the  noble  ideals  which inspired our national struggle for freedom;

( c )  to  uphold  and  protect  the  sovereignty,  unity and integrity of India;

( d )  to  defend  the  country  and  render  national service when called upon to do so;

( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood  amongst  all  the  people  of  India transcending  religious,  linguistic  and  regional  or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;

( f )  to  value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;

( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures;

( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;

( i )  to  safeguard  public  property  and  to  abjure violence;

( j )  to  strive  towards  excellence  in  all  spheres  of individual and collective  activity  so  that  the  nation constantly  rises  to  higher  levels  of  endeavour  and achievement;

*[( k )  who  is  a  parent  or  guardian  to  provide opportunities  for  education  to  his  child  or,  as    the case  may  be,  ward  between  the  age  of  six  and fourteen years.]

1 Ins.  by  the  Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). *Ins.  by  the  Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (which is yet not in force,  date  to  be  notified  later  on).

Fundamental duties.