<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Dear Mom-to-be,

You want to have a healthy baby and keep yourself healthy, too. Eating right and getting health care helps you reach your goal. WIC offers you:

-  Referrals to healthcare and other services.
-  Information about nutrition, healthy foods, and active living.
-  Breastfeeding support.
-  Checks for healthy foods.

The tips in this booklet do not replace your doctor's advice.  Write down questions before you go. Talk with your doctor at your prenatal checkups.

When you pick up your WIC checks, you can learn more about healthy eating. WIC has nutrition groups for you and other moms to learn, share ideas, and ask questions. We hope you enjoy being on WIC.

Sincerely, Your WIC staff

Next steps:

## Get Prenatal Care

Prenatal care is health care for pregnant women. A doctor or specially trained nurse checks that you and your baby are okay.

Typically your prenatal checkups will be:

- 1 checkup each month for the first 6 months.
- 2 checkups each month in the 7th and 8th months.
- 1 checkup each week in the 9th month.
- 1 checkup 6 weeks after your baby is born (postpartum).

Get prenatal care as soon as you think you're pregnant. Go to all your checkups. You can learn more about your baby and how your body is changing.

If you need help to pay for prenatal care contact:

- ParentHelp123: call 1-800-322-2588 or visit parenthelp123.org. They can also help you with finding low cost medical and dental clinics, WIC clinics, food banks, and other helpful services.
- Washington Helpline 2-1-1: call 211 or visit win211.org

<!-- image -->

## Choose healthy foods for you and your baby.

## GRAINS

6 ounces

(6 servings or more)

VEGETABLES 2½ cups (5 servings or more)

## FRUITS

1½ cups (3 servings or more)

DAIRY 3 cups (3 servings)

PROTEIN 5 1/2 ounces

(or more)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

}

- Your baby grows best when you eat right.
- Every day, eat foods from all 5 food groups.

## 1 ounce is 1 serving

- 1 slice bread or tortilla
- ½ bagel or hamburger bun
- ½ cup cooked rice, noodles, or cereal
- 1 cup flake-type cereal

## 1/2 cup is 1 serving

- 1 cup raw or cooked vegetables
- 2 cups lettuce or other leafy greens
- 1 cup vegetable or tomato juice

## 1/2 cup is 1 serving

- ½ cup chopped or cooked fruits
- 1 medium apple, orange, peach, etc.
- ½ cup 100% fruit juice
- ½ cup dried fruit

## 1 cup is 1 serving

- 1 cup lowfat (1%) or fat free milk
- 1 cup yogurt
- 1 to 2 slices cheese

## 1 ounce is 1 serving

- 1 ounce meat, chicken, turkey, or fish
- ¼ cup canned light tuna
- 1 egg
- ¼ cup cooked beans or tofu
- 1 tablespoon peanut butter

## Tip

- Eat whole grains like:
- Oatmeal
- Whole wheat bread
- Brown rice
- Corn or whole wheat tortillas

## Tips

- Eat many kinds and colors: dark green, orange, red, yellow, purple, and white
- Add to: scrambled eggs, rice, noodles, salads, and casseroles

## Tips

- Eat many kinds and colors: red, yellow, orange, blue, green, and white
- Put sliced or chopped fruit on cereal, pancakes, pudding, or yogurt

## Tips

- Buy lowfat (1%) or fat free milk
- If it is hard to drink milk, ask WIC for ideas

## Tips

- A 3-ounce serving is the size of a deck of cards
- Eat more beans like you get from WIC; ask WIC for recipes
- Choose lean meats: bake, broil, or grill them

## Sample Menu

You and your baby do best when you eat regular meals and snacks. Here is a sample menu using some of your WIC foods.

## Breakfast

Eggs Whole-wheat toast Banana Lowfat milk

## Morning Snack

Plain yogurt Orange slices

## Lunch

Chili with beans Cornbread or tortilla Broccoli Water

## Afternoon Snack

Wheat crackers Sliced cheese Veggie sticks 100% juice

## Dinner

Chicken Brown rice Carrots Salad-lettuce, tomato Lowfat milk

<!-- image -->

## Snack Smart

When you want a snack, have one of these:

- Banana or other fruit
- Apple slices or banana with peanut butter
- Pudding made with lowfat milk
- Cheese slice on whole wheat toast
- Carrot sticks dipped in salsa
- Nuts and raisins
- Lowfat yogurt
- Tomato juice
- Hard cooked egg
- WIC cereal

<!-- image -->

## Fast Food Restaurant Tips

## On the go? Ask for these fast foods:

- Grilled chicken sandwich
- Hamburger or cheeseburger
- Main dish salad or side salad
- Pizza topped with green peppers, tomatoes, and mushrooms
- Bean burrito
- Baked potato with vegetable and cheese toppings
- Fruit
- Water, lowfat milk, or juice

## Mini Meals

## If you don't feel like eating, try a mini meal.

Pick a food from each group.

Example: Cold cereal + Lowfat milk + Banana

| GROUP 1              | GROUP 2             | GROUP 3        |
|----------------------|---------------------|----------------|
| Bagel                | Cheese              | Broccoli       |
| Sweet potato         | Cottage cheese      | Carrots        |
| Cold cereal          | Frozen yogurt       | Green peppers  |
| Whole wheat tortilla | Lowfat milk         | Raw spinach    |
| Crackers             | Milkshake           | Tomato         |
| English muffin       | Pudding             | Tomato soup    |
| Graham crackers      | Yogurt              | Vegetable soup |
| Hamburger bun        | Cooked beans        | Apple          |
| Noodles              | Cooked chicken      | Banana         |
| Noodle soup          | Cooked meat         | Grapes         |
| Oatmeal or grits     | Egg, hard cooked    | Melon          |
| Pita bread           | Egg salad           | Orange         |
| Raisin bread         | Egg, scrambled      | Peach          |
| Rice                 | Hamburger           | Pineapple      |
| Roll                 | Nuts (like walnuts) | Raisins        |
| Whole grain bread    | Peanut butter       | Strawberries   |

<!-- image -->

## Food Safety Tips

- Wash your hands with soap and water before you eat or prepare food.
- Wash vegetables and fruit with water before eating or cooking.
- Cook meat, chicken, turkey, fish, and seafood to the well-done stage.
- Cook hot dogs, cold cuts, and deli meats like bologna, salami, or ham until steaming hot before eating.
- If you eat fish one or more times a week, ask WIC or your doctor for more information.

## Take Prenatal Vitamins

Prenatal vitamins have extra iron and folic acid to help your baby grow. Check to see if your prenatal vitamin has at least 150 mcg of iodine. If the prenatal vitamin you take doesn't have this amount of iodine, ask your doctor. Take the pill with water. If it's hard to take, talk with your doctor. Don't take any other vitamins unless prescribed by your doctor.

## Keep Your Teeth Healthy.

To keep your teeth and gums healthy, be sure to:

- Brush your teeth (and tongue) at least two times a day.
- Floss your teeth two times a day.
- Drink water, not sugary drinks.
- Get a dental checkup.

Use a soft-bristle toothbrush. Brush gently. If your gums bleed when you brush or floss, tell your doctor.

## Be Active for a Healthy Body.

Your body stays fit when you move it. If your doctor says it's okay, keep active. Walking and swimming are two ways. You'll feel good because you:

- Have more energy and feel less tired
- Sleep better

Find time to be active for 30 minutes most or all days of the week.

You can break the time up like this:

- Walk 10 minutes in the morning
- Walk 10 minutes in the afternoon
- Walk 10 minutes in the evening

<!-- image -->

## Weight Gain

The amount of weight you should gain depends on your weight before pregnancy. Ask your doctor, nurse, or WIC staff for a weight graph to track your progress.

## You need to gain:

- 25-35 pounds if you were a healthy weight before pregnancy
- 28-40 pounds if you were underweight before pregnancy
- 15-25 pounds if you were overweight before pregnancy
- 11-20 pounds if you were obese before pregnancy

Weight gain during pregnancy helps your baby grow. A steady weight gain is best during pregnancy. First trimester weight gain should be 1-4 pounds. Starting in the 4th month, you may gain about ½ to 1 pound a week.

To keep a steady weight gain:

- Eat when you feel hungry.
- Choose healthy foods to eat.
- Drink water.
- Keep active by walking.

If your weight gain is:

- Just right - You may lose the weight easier after your baby is born.
- Too little - Your baby could be born too small or too soon.
- Too much - It may be harder to lose the weight after the baby is born.

Talk with your doctor about the weight gain that is right for you.

Notes

:

## Keep Your Baby Safe and Healthy

## Don't smoke or use tobacco.

If you smoke, your baby:

- May be born too small or too sick to live.
- May be at risk for crib death (SIDS).
- May be at risk for lung problems like asthma.

Get help to cut back or quit. Talk with your doctor or call the Washington State Quitline at 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) or visit SmokeFreeWashington.com.

## Don't drink beer, wine, liquor, or mixed drinks.

If you drink, your baby:

- May be born with birth defects.
- May have health or learning problems for life.

Even a drink once in a while could hurt your baby. Get help to quit. Talk with your doctor, call 211 the Washington HelpLine, or visit win211.org

## Don't use street drugs or marijuana.

If you use drugs, your baby:

- May be born too small or too sick to live.
- May be born with birth defects.
- May have health or learning problems for life.

Get help to quit. Talk with your doctor, call 211 the Washington HelpLine, or visit win211.org

- Ask your doctor before you take medicine; it may not be safe for your baby. Any medicine, even aspirin, laxatives, or cold tablets may hurt your baby.
- Ask your doctor before you take herbs or drink herbal teas; they may hurt your baby.

## Don't eat certain foods.

Some foods can make you sick or hurt your baby.

## Don't eat:

- Tilefish, swordfish, king mackerel, or shark
- Raw oysters, or fish like sushi or sashimi
- Undercooked, rare or raw meat, chicken, or turkey
- Deli meat, spreads, or patés that haven't been heated to steaming
- Raw or soft-cooked eggs
- Smoked meats
- Uncooked hotdogs
- Feta, blue-veined, Brie, or Mexican-style (queso blanco or queso fresco) cheeses
- Unpasteurized (raw) milk or cheese
- Unpasteurized juice or cider
- Raw sprouts, like alfalfa sprouts

<!-- image -->

## Pregnancy Discomforts

Your body changes when you're pregnant. You might feel sick to your stomach the first 3 or 4 months. Some smells and foods might make you throw up.

## If you feel sick… (Morning Sickness):

- Open the window to let fresh air in and stale air out.
- Get up slowly when you wake up.
- Stay away from smells that make you sick.
- Eat cold foods if the smell of cooked food makes you sick.
- Eat small amounts of food every one or two hours.
- Drink liquids, but take small sips.

## 'Morning sickness' can occur anytime of the day.

<!-- image -->

- Even if you feel sick, you still need food and liquids. If

you can't keep anything down, call your doctor.

As your baby grows, you might get an upset stomach when you eat. It might be hard to move your bowels. Talk to your doctor if you get these problems. Don't take medicine unless advised by your doctor. Here are some tips:

## If you have heartburn…(Indigestion):

- Eat 5 or 6 small meals, not 2 or 3 large ones.
- Eat less fried or greasy foods.
- Eat less spicy foods.
- Drink small sips of water with your meals.
- Walk after you eat.
- Avoid caffeine in soda, coffee, or tea.

<!-- image -->

## If you're constipated:

- Eat foods with fiber like:
- Vegetables
- Fruits
- Dried beans and peas
- Whole grain cereals
- Whole wheat bread and crackers
- Whole wheat noodles
- Brown rice
- Corn tortillas
- Drink plenty of fluids, like water
- Walk after you eat

<!-- image -->

## Give Your Baby the Best Start Breastfeed!

Breastmilk is all your baby needs for the first 6 months of life. Your milk has the right ingredients in the right amounts to give your baby the healthiest start in life. Breastfeeding is good for you too.

Breastfeeding moms say:

- 'I feel more bonded with my baby.'
- 'Nighttime feedings are easier.'
- 'It saves me time - I don't need to mix formula or clean bottles.'
- 'It saves me money - I don't need to buy formula or bottles.'

## Breastfeeding protects your baby's health.

Babies who aren't breastfed have higher risks of:

- SIDS -Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
- Allergies
- Illnesses, like colds, respiratory infections and the flu
- Obesity
- Diarrhea and constipation

## Breastfeeding is good for mom, too.

Breastfeeding helps you:

- Get back to your pre-pregnancy size quicker
- Reduce your risk of obesity, heart attack and stroke
- Lower your risk of breast and other cancers
- Keep your bones strong

## Breastfeeding Facts

- Having questions about breastfeeding is normal. about your questions and concerns.
- Talk to WIC staff

You can make all of the milk your baby needs. Breastfeeding your baby whenever baby is hungry and exclusively breastfeeding for the first 4-6 weeks will protect your milk supply.

- Holding baby skin-to skin while in the hospital and after going home, helps you make milk.

Nursing shouldn't hurt. If it hurts, get help. Call your medical provider, WIC clinic, local hospital, La Leche League (LLL), the Family Health Hotline at 1-800-322-2588, or the National Breastfeeding Helpline at 1-800-994-9662 (Please note: This helpline is an information and referral service only and does not provide medical diagnosis or answer medical questions).

- Ask for help at home, especially in the early days. Ask family and friends to pitch in with household chores and to watch other children. Dad can hold baby skin-to-skin, help with baths and playtime. Babies need lots of love and cuddling in addition to feeding time.
- Yes, you can go back to work or school and continue breastfeeding. New laws require many workplaces to support breastfeeding employees. Ask your employer or WIC staff for more information.
- Moms who nurse can eat their favorite foods! No special diet is needed.
- Washington state laws protect moms when nursing in public.

Have concerns about breastfeeding in public? Ask WIC staff.

## Did you know?

- Most over-the-counter and prescription medicines are safe while nursing. Ask WIC staff or your baby's doctor about any medicines (even birth control pills, cold medication, aspirin, etc.) you're taking.
- The caffeine in coffee, tea, and some sodas get into breastmilk and can make your baby fussy. Try cutting back and see if it helps.
- Alcohol passes into your milk. It's best to avoid beer, wine, and mixed drinks. If you have questions, ask your baby's doctor or a breastfeeding counselor.
- Nicotine from cigarettes passes into your milk. Quit smoking if you can. If you can't quit, keep breastfeeding and:
- Cut back smoking as much as possible.
- Smoke outside and ask others to do the same.
- Smoke just after nursing.
- Mothers who use street drugs shouldn't breastfeed and should stop using drugs.
- If a mother or her partner is HIV-positive or has AIDS, she shouldn't breastfeed. If you think you have AIDS or are at risk for it, get tested.

## Take Time for Yourself.

## Having a baby is hard work!

At times you may feel tired, emotional, and grumpy. You might even feel sad. Find time to relax and get some rest. If you feel overwhelmed, get help.

- Ask for help from family and friends.
- Find someone to talk to, like your family doctor. To find a doctor or nurse, call the Family Health Hotline at 1-800-322-2588.
- Call the Postpartum Support International Warmline at 1-800-944-4PPD (1-800-944-4773) any hour of the day or night.

If you have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby, get immediate help by calling 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255).

If your problems seem too much, call the Crisis Line at 1-866-4-CRISIS (1-866-427-4747).

There are people who care, call Safe Place for Newborns at 1-877-440-2229 or visit safeplacefornewbornswa.org.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

WHealth

<!-- image -->

This institution is an equal opportunity provider. Washington State WIC Nutrition Program does not discriminate.

For persons with disabilities, this document is available on request in other formats. To submit a request, please call 1-800-841-1410 (TDD/TTY 711).