## DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR PREGNANCY MEDICAID APPROVAL

## 1. Verification of pregnancy form

This document must be on letterhead and can be provided by any doctor, midwife or nurse and can also be provided by any site listed on the 'Pregnancy Testing Locations' sheet.  It is provided after a positive pregnancy test has been completed. Home pregnancy test results are not accepted.

## 2. Proof of identity (ID) and Proof of U.S. Citizenship

The following documents prove both citizenship and identity .  Give us one of these documents, if possible:

-  U.S. passport
-  Certificate of Naturalization
-  Certificate of U.S. Citizenship.

If you do not have one of the documents listed above, then we need one document from each of the lists below.  This means you will need to provide two documents with your application.

| To Verify Citizenship (one document needed):                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | To Verify Identity (one document needed):                                        |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  U.S. birth certificate  U.S. Citizen Identification Card  Resident Alien Card or Green card  A final adoption decree  A document showing civil service employment before June 1, 1976  Official military record of service showing a U.S. place of birth |  Driver's license or state ID  Government or school ID card  Military ID card |

## 3. Proof of income

Submit copies of the most recent 4 weeks of pay stubs for all persons working in the home and providing financial support for the pregnant woman, including her own pay stubs.  Submit monthly unearned income for all people in the filing unit (alimony, child support, unemployment, SS income, contributions, etc.)  If nobody in the home is working, you must provide a signed letter from the person you are living with or who is paying your bills indicating this information.  If the father of the unborn baby is living in the household, his income must be included and verified.  Additional documents may be required.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Additional Instructions:

-  If you are mailing in your application, make an extra copy of all documents being mailed, including your completed application, and keep them for your records.  If you are faxing it, please keep the confirmation sheet that indicates the fax went through successfully.
-  IMPORTANT: Write your name, social security number and Florida case or ACCESS number, if available, on ALL document copies submitted just in case they are accidentally separated from your Medicaid application.
-  Mail or fax in your application and/or back up documentation as indicated on the ' Notice to Pregnant Women ' information sheet.
-  Call ACCESS line 1-866-762-2237 if you do not receive a response in the mail or by phone within two (2) weeks of your Simplified Eligibility for Pregnant Women (SEPW) Medicaid application.
-  If you need additional instructions or guidance, or require assistance in choosing a prenatal care provider (doctor or midwife), please call the MomCare Program at the Broward Healthy Start Coalition, Inc. at (954) 567-7174 x1319 for further assistance.