## Protect yourself &amp; your growing family

Like most moms-to-be, you want to give your baby a healthy start in life.

Vaccines (also called immunizations) are a safe way to protect you and your baby from some harmful diseases .

<!-- image -->

## Where can I get immunized?

- Doctor's office: Ask during your next prenatal check up!
- Pharmacy: If your doctor doesn't have them, ask for a prescription and take it to the pharmacy. Call ahead to check their hours and if your insurance covers all of the vaccines recommended in pregnancy: Tdap, COVID-19, flu and RSV. If you have Medi-Cal, vaccines should be covered at the pharmacy.

You can also visit myturn.ca.gov or call your health plan to find where you can get your vaccines. After getting immunized, ask for a vaccine record and bring it to your next prenatal visit. You can also download your digital vaccine record at mydvr.cdph. ca.gov.

For more info, see FAQs on vaccine safety (bit.ly/prenatalvaccines).

This publication was supported by a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) grant. Its contents do not necessarily represent the views of CDC.

September 2025 · © 2025, California Department of Public Health

IMM-887 (9/25) ADA

## Pregnancy for a Healthy Immunizations

<!-- image -->

## having a baby? Thinking of

Get shots before you get pregnant Whether it is your first baby, or you are planning to have another child, get up-to-date on your vaccines to protect you and your family. Talk with your doctor about which vaccines are right for you.

## Pre-Pregnancy Immunization Checklist

- MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) 3
- Flu (influenza)-as soon as vaccine
- Chickenpox 3
- is available 3
- Hepatitis B 3
- Updated  COVID-19 3
- Other vaccines recommended by your doctor 3

<!-- image -->

## Good News!

If you missed getting these vaccines before becoming pregnant, you can get them after your baby is born.

## pregnant... Now that you are

## Your baby counts on you for BEST protection!

Flu and COVID-19 are more likely to cause serious problems for you and your baby during your pregnancy. Whooping cough and Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) can also be deadly for newborn babies.

## Ask your doctor for these vaccines:

- Tdap (whooping cough vaccine)-at 27-36 weeks of pregnancy, even if you got it before pregnancy 3
- Flu-as soon as vaccine is available 3
- RSV vaccine-September-January, between 32 and 36 weeks of pregnancy 3
- Updated COVID-19 vaccine-if you haven't received it yet. 3

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

These vaccines are safe. The protection you get from these vaccines passes to your baby before birth. This will help protect your baby in early life.

## Good News!

If you missed getting your RSV vaccine during pregnancy, your baby can get their own RSV immunization soon after birth.

<!-- image -->

## After your baby is born…

Circle your baby with protection Newborns are too young to get flu, COVID-19 and whooping cough shots. While getting these vaccines during pregnancy is most protective, make sure to get any shots you missed.

## To further protect your baby:

- Keep your baby away from sick people. 3

3

Ask people around your baby to stay up to date on vaccines (like flu, whooping cough, and COVID-19) and wash hands often.

<!-- image -->

Vaccinate your baby on time to protect them from dangerous diseases as soon as possible.

## Good News!

Getting routine vaccines while you are breastfeeding is safe for you and your baby.

<!-- image -->