## Y our Pregnancy Resource Guide

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Welcome to TMCObstetrics

This guide is designed to make it easy to find accurate information and useful resources during and after your pregnancy.

Please bring this guide to each visit. It will be a helpful reference if you have questions about something you read, or if you would like to discuss your To Do List.

Every pregnancy is different, and it is important to remember that the information and resources in this guide may not be applicable to all pregnancies or all situations.

We understand information provided by friends, family, and the internet may be conflicting, and we have created Your Pregnancy Resource Guide to provide consistent information you can rely on.

If you have any questions please call us at (520) 795-8188 or ask at your next appointment.

<!-- image -->

TMC Obstetrics

## Over-the-Counter Treatments

The following is a summary of some medications and natural treatments that are safer options to use during pregnancy for common discomforts (please discuss your discomfort with us at your next appointment). These medications and treatments are available at most pharmacies.

<!-- image -->

You MUST consult our clinical staff first if you have medical history, such as high blood pressure, diabetes or any other chronic illness or medical challenge.

We are here for you. This summary is NOT meant to deter you from calling the office if you have questions.

## Congestion

- Tylenol Cold and Sinus
- Chlor-Trimeton - Benadryl
- Sudafed (every 6 hours as needed, red box only)
- Saline nasal spray or rinse
- Neti-Pot (use boiled or distilled water)

## Allergies

- Claritin
- Allegra
- Zyrtec
- Benadryl
- Saline nasal spray or Neti-Pot (use boiled or distilled water)

## Cough

- Robitussin-DM (only if there is no fever)
- Mucinex brand - choice of symptoms
- Cough drop - Cepacol
- Elderberry syrup or lozenges
- Warm tea with lemon and 1 tbsp honey at night

## Constipation

- Colace or Miralax
- Fiber supplements: Metamucil - Citrucel or Fibercon (take with plenty of water)
- Warm water with lemon each morning
- If above doesn't work, try Senokot or Dulcolax suppositories

## Heartburn/Indigestion

- Tums - Rolaids
- Maalox - Mylanta
- Prilosec
- Pepcid - Zantac - Tagamet
- Papaya enzymes

## Diarrhea

- Kaopectate
- Imodium AD (only if there is no fever)
- Recharge drink (R.W. Knudsen brand, Gatorade only if Recharge not available)

## Minor Aches/Pains

- Tylenol (not aspirin)
- Pain patches
- Local heat or ice
- Massage, acupuncture
- Warm epsom salt bath

## Hemorrhoids

- Tucks
- Preparation H - Anusol
- Maternity belt
- Sitz bath with epsom salt

## Relief from Common Pregnancy Discomforts

| Heartburn           | • Eat small, frequent meals instead of three big meals • Avoid lying down for 2-3 hours after eating • Use an extra pillow at night                                                                                                            |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Fatigue             | • Group small activities together • Stay hydrated • Walk daily • Nap and go to bed early if you can • Turn off electronics 1 hour (or more) before bed                                                                                         |
| Frequent Urination  | • Avoid excess caffeine, spicy food, tomatoes, or citrus - which are bladder irritants • Stay hydrated, even if it means frequent bathroom trips • Use the bathroom as soon as you feel the urge - this helps prevent urinary tract infections |
| Leg Cramps          | • Stretch before bed • During the cramp: massage, stretch with toes flexed (not pointed) • Eat high magnesium foods and ask us about magnesium supplements • Warm baths                                                                        |
| Lower Back Pain     | • Keep good posture • Gentle stretching and exercise - do 'cat-cow' hands and knees every evening • Warm baths and massage                                                                                                                     |
| Round Ligament Pain | • Maternity support belt • Warm baths • Lie down on your side and support your belly with a pillow                                                                                                                                             |
| Itchy Skin          | • Stay hydrated • Apply moisturizer daily, and after you shower or bathe • Use natural, moisturizing soaps only and use sparingly • Try bathing or showering less, such as every other day                                                     |
| Stretch marks       | • See above - same treatments in the Itchy Skin section • Please note that moisturizer/cream/oil will NOT prevent stretch marks if you are prone to them, but they may reduce the severity                                                     |
| Swelling            | • Stay hydrated and eat protein with each meal • Elevate swollen limbs above the level of the heart if possible • Massage                                                                                                                      |
| Varicose Veins      | • Can try support stockings • Elevate legs when possible and do not cross them • If standing for long periods of time, take sitting breaks when you can                                                                                        |

## Quick Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy

## Initiate Prenatal Care Early

Establishing early prenatal care with your OB care provider is the first step toward a healthy and happy pregnancy outcome.

## Keep All of Y our Prenatal Appointments

All of your appointments during your pregnancy are important for maintaining a healthy pregnancy. Try not to put off getting labs drawn or keeping referral appointments.

## Talk to Y our Health Care Provider

Your OB provider is there to support you during your pregnancy, and is available to answer all of your pregnancy questions and concerns.

## Enroll in a Birthing Class

Knowing what to expect can be the key to a wonderful birthing experience and help you to prepare for what's to come.

## Drink Plenty of Fluids

Fluids help carry nutrients to your baby. They can also help with constipation and swelling. Water and milk or milk alternatives are good choices, but you should limit your intake of juice and caffeine from coffee, tea and soda.

## Eat Healthy

A variety of foods rich in vitamins, minerals and fiber are important for good nutrition in pregnancy. Limit excess salt (sodium) and sugar. Eat plenty of vegetables, whole grains, proteins including safe, low-mercury fish, and some fruit.

## Avoid Risky Foods

Avoid raw or undercooked eggs, meat, fish, shellfish or sprouts, unpasteurized cheese or milk, and if you eat deli meat or hot dogs cook them first until steaming. Ask your OB provider or see later in this guide for which cooked fish are good to eat.

## Get Calcium, Iron, and Folic Acid in Y our Diet

These are key vitamins and minerals which can help prevent birth defects, build strong bones and help your baby grow.

## Get Plenty of Exercise

Unless you have been told otherwise by your OB provider, regular exercise is recommended for pregnant women. Walking, swimming and yoga can be good for pregnant moms. Spread out your activities throughout the week and don't over-do it.

## Have a Healthy Weight Goal

Discuss a weight goal for your pregnancy with your OB provider and check it regularly to maintain a healthy weight.

## Be Sure to Rest to Keep Up Your Energy

Try to get 7-9 hours of sleep every night, and take breaks or naps during the day.

## Keep Away From Alcohol, Tobacco or Other Drugs

The use of alcohol, tobacco, and other illicit drugs can cause complications for your pregnancy including miscarriage and birth defects. If you need help quitting, talk to your OB provider. There are cessation in pregnancy programs available.

## Prevent Hazardous and Infectious Exposures

Avoid exposure to chemicals such as oven cleaners, pesticides, paint remover, paint fumes, and lead in paint and water. Avoid excess heat from hot tubs and saunas. Wash your hands often and well, get recommended vaccines and avoid cat feces.

## A Strong Support T eam is The Key

Your family and friends are your greatest asset for support. They can help to monitor your emotions before the birth and after. This can help with the recognition and treatment of postpartum depression.

## To Do List

## First T rimester (weeks 1-12)

- [ ] o Read through this guide

- [ ] o Start prenatal vitamins with DHA

- [ ] o Decide on your preferences for genetic screening and testing

- [ ] o Sign up for childbirth classes

- [ ] o Visit your dentist for a checkup and cleaning

- [ ] o Establish safe, healthy and reasonable eating and exercise habits

## Second Trimester (weeks 13-27)

- [ ] o Enjoy a hospital tour

- [ ] o Maintain healthy eating and exercise habits

- [ ] o If you plan to breastfeed, sign up for a breastfeeding class

- [ ] o Start or continue Kegel exercises

- [ ] o Decide who will support you during labor

## Third Trimester (weeks 28-Delivery)

- [ ] o Choose a pediatrician

- [ ] o Ask friends and family for recommendations

- [ ] o Most clinics will help you set up a meet and greet with the pediatrician before you give birth

- [ ] o Be ready to tell the staff in Labor and Delivery which pediatrician you chose

- [ ] o Install your baby's car seat

- [ ] o Ensure you have a safe place for your baby to sleep

- [ ] o Create a birth plan (this is optional)

- [ ] o Pack your hospital bag (ask us or search online for tips)

- [ ] o Think about your plan for birth control

- [ ] o Maintain healthy eating and exercise habits

## If you are planning to breastfeed

- [ ] o Have supplies ready, such as nursing bras, nipple cream and breast pads for leaking

- [ ] o Order your pump if needed (we can provide a prescription if needed)

- [ ] o Have bags and bottles ready for your breast pump

## If you are planning to bottle feed

- [ ] o Have supplies ready, such as bottles and a sports bra/cabbage leaves to comfort engorged breasts

- [ ] o Research and buy preferred formula

- [ ] o You may have to change formulas based on your baby's preference, dietary needs or due to digestive issues

## Travel During Pregnancy

- Avoid areas with risks of Malaria or Zika
- For international travel
-  T alk to your OB provider and go to a travel clinic at least one month before you travel
-  Make sure your health insurance covers you in another country
-  If needed, purchase supplemental health insurance for traveling abroad
- If you do not have other complications, you can usually fly until 36 weeks
- Blood clots are more likely if you fly or drive for extended periods while pregnant
-  Walk every hour and do leg exercises while sitting
-  Stay hydrated
-  Consider compression stockings
- Can usually take a cruise until 24 weeks of pregnancy
- Car crashes while traveling are a leading cause of injury
-  Always wear a seatbelt, waist belt goes below your belly and use the shoulder strap
- Careful with food abroad in developing countries
-  Only eat steaming hot food
-  Only drink bottled water, do not drink anything with ice
-  Only eat fresh fruits and vegetables that you can peel or wash in bottled water

<!-- image -->

More information about traveling during pregnancy is available at https:/ /wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/pregnant-travelers

## If you live far from TMCObstetrics

<!-- image -->

Do NOT drive yourself if you think you are in labor, your water has broken or you are bleeding!

- Call 911 if you think you are having an emergency or go to the nearest Emergency Department
- Talk to us about when to come in for labor
-  We may ask you to come in as soon as you think labor has started
- We may discuss a scheduled induction of labor depending on your circumstances
- Stay hydrated and do leg exercises while sitting in the car or on public transportation

## Healthy Eating During Pregnancy

## Healthy Snack Ideas

- Broccoli/Carrots and hummus or black bean dip
- Yogurt without added sugar
- Add berries or other fruit instead
- Dried fruit (in moderation) and nuts
- Whole wheat toast and peanut butter or avocado
- Sweet potato and a dollop of sour cream
- Cottage cheese
- Hard-boiled egg

## Limit

- Anything with added sugar
- White rice
- Potatoes or fries
- White bread, flour tortillas, pasta or crackers

## Avoid

- Raw/Undercooked meat, fish or eggs
- Smoked seafood (smoked salmon, whitefish, etc.)
- Patés or meat spreads
- Raw sprouts
- Unpasteurized cheese or milk
- Some soft cheese such as queso blanco, queso fresco, feta or brie may not be pasteurized
- Fish with high mercury content
- Hot dogs and deli meat - unless you watch them be reheated until steaming!

## Pregnancy in the desert: Staying Hydrated

<!-- image -->

Can help minimize swelling · Will help give you energy Can help avoid dizziness and shortness of breath

- Try to drink 3 liters of water per day (almost a gallon)
- Add lemon or small amounts of fruit if water doesn't taste good while pregnant
- 1-2 cups of (safe) herbal tea
- 1-2 cups of milk or milk substitute
- 1 cup of juice
- Juice has a high sugar content
- Avoid Vitamin Water and Gatorade - which have excess sugar

## Herbal T ea

| Safe in Moderation*                                                                         | Avoid                                                                                                                                               |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| • Chamomile • Peppermint or Wintergreen • Ginger • Lemon Balm • Rose Hips *1-2 cups per day | • Ginseng • Licorice - Common in many herbal mixes • Sage • Excess caffeine from black, oolong, green or white tea - One average-strength cup is OK |

<!-- image -->

## Increasing Y our Iron

## Be creative with iron rich foods!

|                    | Meats and Fish                                     | Vegetables                                  | Fruits                                                    | Other                                                                                                                              |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Highest Iron       | • Beef • Lamb • Veal • Clams or Oysters • Sardines | • Spinach • Peas • Endive • Canned Tomatoes | • Dried Fruits: Apricots, Peaches, and Figs • Prune Juice | • White Beans • Low-sugar, enriched breakfast cereal • Cream of Wheat • Lentils • Tofu • Kidney Beans • Garbanzo Beans 'Chickpeas' |
| Other Good Options | • Chicken • Salmon • Egg Yolks                     | • Peas • Leeks • Broccoli                   | • Dates • Strawberries • Raisins (sparingly)              | • Nuts: Pistachios, Cashews and Almonds                                                                                            |

- Pair your iron rich foods (or iron supplement) with food or drinks that are high in Vitamin C. This helps your body to absorb as much iron as possible.
- Good choices can be fruit, especially citrus and tropical fruits, salsa, salads or a small cup of orange juice.
- Iron supplements can cause constipation. If this happens please let us know.
- You can try some natural remedies for constipation:
- Drinking hot water with lemon in the mornings.
- Going for a daily walk.
- Eating dried fruit such as prunes and apricots (sparingly, high sugar content).
- Adding chia or flax seeds to your diet.
- Until you talk to us, you can try taking your supplement less often - once a day or every other day.

<!-- image -->

## Weight Gain During Pregnancy

<!-- image -->

The average recommended weight gain is 25-35 pounds. Weight gain recommendations are different for mothers expecting multiples, and expectant mothers who are underweight, overweight or obese.

## First Trimester:

Minimal to no extra calories

## Second Trimester:

200-300 extra calories

- → A banana with a handful of pistachios

## Third Trimester/Breastfeeding:

400-500 extra calories

- → A cup of broccoli with hummus, an egg and a cup of berries with yogurt

## Advice About Eating Fish

## What Pregnant Women &amp; Parents Should Know

| Baby                           | 8 pounds   |
|--------------------------------|------------|
| Breast Tissue                  | 2-3 pounds |
| Uterus                         | 2-5 pounds |
| Placenta                       | 2-3 pounds |
| Amniotic Fluid                 | 2-3 pounds |
| Increased Blood Supply         | 4 pounds   |
| Stored Fat (for breastfeeding) | 5-9 pounds |

www.webmd.com/babyguide/healthy-weight-gain#1

For women of childbearing age (about 16-49 years old), especially pregnant and breastfeeding women, and for parents and caregivers of young children.

- Eat 2 to 3 servings of fish a week from the 'Best Choices' list OR 1 serving from the 'Good Choices' list.
- Eat a variety of fish.

Fish and other protein-rich foods have nutrients that can help your child's growth and development.

- Serve 1 to 2 servings of fish a week to children, starting at age 2.
- If you eat fish caught by family or friends, check for fish advisories. If there is no advisory, eat only one serving and no other fish that week.*

## Best Choices EAT 2 TO 3 SERVINGS A WEEK

## Use this chart!

You can use this chart to help you choose which fish to eat, and how often to eat them, based on their mercury levels. The 'Best Choices' have the lowest levels of mercury.

## What is a serving?

To find out, use the palm of your hand!

For an adult 4 ounces

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

For children, ages 4 to 7 2 ounces

<!-- image -->

## Good Choices EAT 1 SERVING A WEEK

Anchovy

Atlantic croaker

Atlantic mackerel

Black sea bass

Butterfish

Catfish

Clam

Cod

Crab

Crawfish

Flounder

Haddock

Hake

Scallop

Shad

Shrimp

Skate

Smelt

Sole

Squid

Tilapia

Trout, freshwater

Tuna, canned light

(includes skipjack)

Whitefish

Whiting

Herring

Lobster,

American and spiny

Mullet

Oyster

Pacific chub

mackerel

Perch, freshwater

and ocean

Pickerel

Plaice

Pollock

Salmon

Sardine

Some fish caught by family and friends, such as larger carp, catfish, trout and perch, are more likely to have fish advisories due to mercury or other contaminants. State advisories will tell you how often you can safely eat those fish. *

Tilefish (Atlantic Ocean)

Tuna, albacore/ white tuna, canned and fresh/frozen

Tuna, yellowfin

Weakfish/seatrout

White croaker/

Pacific croaker

Bluefish

Monkfish

Buffalofish

Carp

Chilean sea bass/

Patagonian toothfish

Grouper

Halibut

Mahi mahi/

dolphinfish

## Choices to Avoid HIGHEST MERCURY LEVELS

Tilefish (Gulf of Mexico) Tuna, bigeye

King mackerel

Marlin

Orange roughy

Shark

Swordfish

www.FDA.gov/fishadvice www.EPA.gov/fishadvice

<!-- image -->

THIS ADVICE REFERS TO FISH AND SHELLFISH COLLECTIVELY AS 'FISH.' / ADVICE UPDATED JANUARY 2017

For more information on fish safety, reference the EWG's Good Seafood Guide at www.ewg.org

<!-- image -->

Rockfish

Sablefish

Sheepshead

Snapper

Spanish mackerel

Striped bass

(ocean)

## FOO SAFETAhBadyadJ me

Learn thefoodsafetystepsthatwillkeepexpectingmomssafefromfoodborneillness.

## FOODSTOAVOIDWHILEPREGNANT

<!-- image -->

## Foods to Avoid

Here'sWhy

Rawseafood

Unpasteurizedjuice, ciderandmilk

Soft cheese and cheesemade from unpasteurized milk

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Undercooked eggs

Premade deli salads (egg.pasta,chicken,etc.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Rawsprouts

<!-- image -->

Cold hot dogs and luncheonmeats

<!-- image -->

Undercookedmeat and poultry

May contain parasites orbacteria

May contain Ecol orListerio

May contain E.colior Listeria

May contain Salmonella

Maycontain Listero collior Salmonella May contain E.

May contain Listeria

May contain E.col Salmonella, Campylobacter, Toxoplasmagondit

## Listeria monocytogenes

Pregnant women are

<!-- image -->

Listeriosiscan cause:

<!-- image -->

labor

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Low-bith weight

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Wash hands and surfaces often.

to get Listeriosis.

## Foodsto Eat

Fish cooked to145F

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Pasteurizedversions aresafer alternatives.

<!-- image -->

Hard cheese&amp;cheese made with pasteurized milk

<!-- image -->

Eggswith firmyolks

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Make these dishes athome

Cook thoroughly

Reheat to steaming hotor165'F

<!-- image -->

## 10 times morelikely

Meat andpoultry at orabove theUSDA recommended internal temperature

<!-- image -->

These foodborne illnesses can infect your baby even if you do not feel sick.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Clean:

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SAFEINTERNAL COOKING TEMPERATURES

## 145°F

<!-- image -->

Beef,pork,veal and lamb steaks,roasts and chops witha3minrest time

Fish.

<!-- image -->

## 160°F

Egg dishes

Ground beef,pork, vealand lamb

<!-- image -->

## 165°F

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Whole,ground, orpieces of chicken, turkey and duck

## Toxoplasma gondii

<!-- image -->

## Toxoplasmosiscancause babiestodevelop:

<!-- image -->

Blindness

## Separate:

<!-- image -->

of Toxoplasmosis infections in the U.s. areacquired from food.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Cook:

Keeprawmeat Aunjnodpue separatefrom ready-to-eat-foods.

Cookfoods to theproper intermal temperature.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Getleftovers to the fridge within2hours of being cooked.

Chill:

ADDITIONALSOURCE:CDC

50%

## Constipation Relief

- Gentle exercise (see tips on the next page)
- Focus on staying hydrated
- Warm water/tea with lemon in the morning
- Flax seeds
- Sprinkle on meats and salads, mix in with yogurt- maximum of 2 tbsp a day
- Chia seeds
- Sprinkle on anything, mix in drinks or mix into spreads
- Leafy green vegetables
- Prunes (sparingly due to sugar content)
- Try mixing in with cereal
- Probiotic yogurt and Kefir

See the over-the-counter treatments section on page 2

## Morning Sickness? All-Day Sickness?

- Eat small, frequent meals so that your stomach is not too full or too empty
- Try to eat something little every two hours
- Nausea triggers:
- Fatty meats, fried foods, pastries, spicy foods, caffeine, cigarettes and cigarette smoke
- When you wake up in the morning, eat something light such as a cracker or two before even moving, wait, and then get up
- Drink fluids before and after meals - not during

## Foods to try when nothing else sounds good

- Plain fruits and vegetables
- High protein snacks
- Plain chicken, nuts, whole grain toast with spread
- Soups broths, water with lemon, ginger tea
- Avoid excess carbohydrates
- Except for crackers before you get up in the morning, which can be helpful

<!-- image -->

Call us or seek care if you are unable to keep fluids down or if you feel weak or dizzy.

## Exercise During Pregnancy

<!-- image -->

Can improve sleep, mood, constipation, back pain, keep you and your baby at a healthy weight, and may make labor and recovery easier.

## Everyday exercises

- Good posture. Think about good posture while sitting and standing. This can help keep your back and abdominal muscles strong.
- Walking, swimming and yoga are great, but please consult with us before starting anything new.
- Range of motion exercises are a good beginning and closing to your day. Gently move each part of your body around, from head to toe. Take your time and do not strain.
- Exercise when watching TV or visiting with people. Try sitting cross-legged on the floor to stretch your thighs and pelvic floor muscles. Rotate your ankles while sitting, bend your elbows up and down, stretch out your legs.
- Getting down on your hands and knees a couple of times a day can relieve a lot of pain caused by stretched ligaments in your back, sides and pelvis. While on the floor, try the gentle cat and cow movements of lifting and arching your back.
- Learn Kegel exercises and do them anywhere. The same muscles you use to stop urinating midstream are Kegel muscles. Do five Kegels for five seconds each, 10 times in a row. Try to do this three times a day. This can help with labor and help avoid leaking and dribbling of urine after you have your baby.

<!-- image -->

## Cautions for exercising during pregnancy

- Please talk to us before doing any exercise if you have high blood pressure, diabetes, a heart condition, placenta previa, a short cervix, any bleeding, or a history preeclampsia or preterm labor.
- Drink a lot of water while you exercise.
- Warm up before and stretch after exercise.
- Avoid overheating.
- Avoid lying on your back after the first trimester.
- It is OK to put a pillow under one hip, so that you are slightly tilted.
- Many women fall during pregnancy, be careful not to do anything that increases your risk of falling.
- Avoid twisting motions, this can injure your back.
- Avoid high risk sports such as soccer, basketball, horseback riding, rock climbing, skiing, gymnastics, scuba diving, and do not lift more than 25 pounds.

## Relaxation and Sleep

## Sleep

- Do some light exercise during the day.
- Turn off all electronics one hour before bed.
- Take an evening shower or bath.
- Warming up, then cooling off mimics natural temperature cues, telling your body it's time to sleep.
- Drink a cup of warm herbal tea.
- Journal for a few minutes before bed.

## Journaling

- Write down any thoughts or worries you are having, what you are grateful for, try some creative writing, or make lists.
- -If you have anxiety, try making a list of things to think about tomorrow, not tonight.
- Although writing can be done anytime, many enjoy writing first thing in the morning or before bed.
- Remember that no one is going to read your journal, and you can feel comfortable writing whatever comes to mind.

## Dental Care

- An infection in your teeth or gums could make it more likely that your baby is born too early or with a low birth weight.
- Going to the dentist is safe during pregnancy.
- Make sure the dentist and staff know you are pregnant.
- Avoid X-rays and procedures until after the first trimester, unless your dentist tells you that there is a problem that cannot wait.

## Ways to keep your mouth healthy during pregnancy

- Brush with a soft toothbrush twice daily.
- Floss once daily.
- If you vomit, rinse your mouth with a cup of water mixed with a teaspoon of baking soda.
- Wait to brush your teeth for an hour if you can.
- Avoid sugary drinks, juices and foods with added sugar.
- Follow a healthy diet and stay hydrated

<!-- image -->

## Healthy Relationships

<!-- image -->

## 24/7 Crisis Line 888-428-0101 or (520) 795-4266

- About 1 in 3 women will be abused in their lifetime ( www.emergecenter.org ).
- -Unfortunately, being pregnant can put women at a higher risk of abuse, due to changes in their life and bodies.
- Abuse can be physical, verbal, sexual, emotional or financial.
- Abuse doesn't always happen every day.
- Your partner may apologize and nothing may happen for weeks or months.
- Resource in Tucson: Emerge! www.emergecenter.org
- Emerge! Provides domestic abuse intervention and services, such as housing, prevention, education and support.

## Examples of abuse

- Any physical harm.
-  Pinching, hitting, slapping or shoving.
- Any threat of harm to you or those you care about, including pets.
- Saying anything that shames you or puts you down, including name calling.
- Keeping you away from friends or family, wanting to know where you are all the time.
- Forcing you to have sex, making you have painful sex or not letting you use birth control.
- Jealous behavior.
- Taking your money, keeping you from working or stopping you from going to school.
- Intentionally breaking your belongings.
- Making threats about what will happen if you leave. Such as taking your children or killing themselves.

## What to do if you are being abused

- Call 911 or the 24 hours a day, seven days a week crisis line: 888-428-0101 or (520) 795-4266
- Tell us at your appointment.
- Plan to go to a safe place such as the police department, a shelter or a friend's home.

<!-- image -->

## Baby Blues and Postpartum Depression

## Baby blues

- May begin soon after birth (can begin two weeks prior to birth).
- You may cry easily and feel lonely, cranky or restless.
- If it is severe or lasts longer than two weeks, you may have postpartum depression.

## Postpartum depression

- Happens to 1 in 5 women and can happen to anyone.
- More likely if you have a history of trauma or behavioral health challenges.

## Signs of postpartum depression

- Experiencing a complete lack of emotions.
- Feeling anxious, panicky, angry, guilty, irritable, persistently sad or hopeless.
- Sleeping all the time or can't sleep even when tired.
- Eating much more or much less than usual.
- Not wanting to spend time with family or friends.
- Not enjoying activities that you used to enjoy.
- Unable to complete daily tasks.
- Feeling afraid to leave the house.
- Feeling afraid of being alone with your baby.
- Being unable to concentrate or make decisions.
- Feeling out of control or like you aren't yourself.
- Feeling like your family may be better off without you.

## What to do

- Any thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.
- Call 911 or go to the Emergency Department.
- Call the Crisis Response Center (24 hours a day, seven days a week) (520) 622-6000.
- Otherwise, call your provider as you may need treatment including counseling or medication to protect you and your baby from long term problems.

## Postpartum Psychosis

- A rare disorder where a woman who has given birth experiences hallucinations, suicidal or homicidal thoughts. She may believe the baby is in trouble, even though the baby is not. Believing someone has taken over her actions is another common symptom.

<!-- image -->

A mother experiencing postpartum psychosis is often unaware she is acting strangely. This puts both the mother and the baby at risk, and is an emergency Call 911 .

## Sex During Pregnancy

<!-- image -->

For most women, it is safe to have sex throughout pregnancy. (Unless your clinical team has provided different instructions)

- The baby is protected by the cervix and amniotic sac, and is cushioned by the amniotic fluid.
- If you have a new partner or you and/or your partner have other partners, you need to protect yourself and your baby from sexually transmitted infections by using condoms.
- You or your partner may desire to have sex more frequently, less frequently, or not at all during different stages of your pregnancy.
- A small amount of spotting after sex is common
- However, if you have spotting for more than two days or bleeding like a period, call us or be seen right away.
- You may need to use lubricant during pregnancy.
- Water-based and silicone-based lubricants are safe with condoms.
- If you do not use condoms, some women prefer organic coconut oil.
- Oral sex and sex using your hands on yourself or your partner are alternatives to vaginal sex. Gentle anal sex during pregnancy is OK if it is comfortable and if you do not have constipation or hemorrhoids. A clean, gentle vibrator is also safe to use.
- Either person should always be able to decline having sex without fear or guilt.
- Keep communication open about how each of you feel about sex. You can spend time together in other ways, such as massage, cuddling and date nights.

## Reasons to avoid sex or orgasm

- Your water broke or you are leaking amniotic fluid.
- Preterm labor or high-risk for preterm labor.
- Vaginal bleeding like your period.
- Placenta previa - your placenta covers any part of your cervix.
- If you have had a cerclage.
- If you or your partner have sores on your mouth or genitals.

## After baby

- Most women need 4-10 weeks to heal before resuming sex after a vaginal delivery.
- After a cesarean section, please check with your OB before having sex again. Sex is usually safe 6-8 weeks after a cesarean section.
- If you are breastfeeding, you may need to use lubricant for the entire time that you breastfeed.
- We recommend you wait at least one year before getting pregnant again. You may be able to become pregnant right away please see the next page.

## Time to Think About Birth Control

Methods less likely to decrease milk supply: Progestin-only pill (mini-pill), intrauterine devices (IUDs), implant, injectable (depo shot), condoms, diaphragm and fertility awareness methods.

## Long acting reversible birth control:

- Paragard IUD: Non-hormonal, approved for 10 years, may make period temporarily heavier.
- Mirena/Liletta IUD: Low hormone, approved for 5 years, may make period lighter or stop altogether.
- Skyla and Kyleena - IUD: Lowest hormone, approved for 3 years and 5 years.
- Nexplanon implant: Intermediate hormone, approved for 3 years, placed into your upper or inner arm, may cause spotting or make your period irregular.

## Effectiveness of Family Planning Methods

<!-- image -->

CS 242797

<!-- image -->

CONDOMS SHOULD ALWAYS BE USED TO REDUCE THE RISK OF SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS.

Other Methods of Contraception

Lactational Amenorrhea Method: LAM is a highly effective, temporary method of contraception. Emergency Contraception: Emergency contraceptive pills or a copper IUD after unprotected intercourse substantially reduces risk  of pregnancy.

Adapted from World Health Organization (WHO) Department of Reproductive Health and Research, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health/Center for Communication Programs (CCP). Knowledge for health project. Family planning: a global handbook for providers (2011 update). Baltimore, MD; Geneva, Switzerland: CCP and WHO; 2011; and Trussell J. Contraceptive failure in the United States. Contraception 2011;83:397-404.

## Resource List

## Phone numbers

- TMC Obstetrics: (520) 795-8188
- Call anytime during normal business hours for appointments and medical questions
- We also have after hours help for emergency calls only
- TMC Labor and Delivery
- If you are more than 20 weeks pregnant and think you are in labor, you do not need to call - just go in to TMC Labor and Delivery!

## Books and Guides

- TMC New Patient Guide: tmcaz.com/maternity - Click on 'Guide for New Parents' on the left of the screen
- Your Pregnancy and Birth: Month to Month by ACOG
- Pregnancy, Childbirth, And The Newborn by Parent Trust for Washington Children
- Real Food for Mother and Baby by Nina Planck
- Real Food for Gestational Diabetes by Lily Nichols
- The Baby Owner's Manual by Louis Borgenicht M.D.
- Be Prepared: A Practical Handbook for New Dads by Gary Greenberg
- The Expectant Father: The Ultimate Guide for Dads-to-Be by Armin A. Brott
- The Birth Partner by Penny Simkin
- Working Without Weaning by Kirsten Berggren
- Work. Pump. Repeat. by Jessica Shortall

## Childbirth Education and Support

- See TMC Handout: (520) 324-1817 tmcaz.com/ childbirth-and-parenting-classes
- Free Healthy Pregnancy Class. Childbirth, Natural Birth, Baby Care and more classes
- Nurse-Family Partnership: (866) 864-5226 nursefamilypartnership.org
- Free pregnancy and parenting support for women having their first baby
- Wisdom Within: (520) 891-5417 wisdomwithinbirth.com
- Mindful Hypnosis: (520) 261-8296 mindfulhypnosiscenter.com

## Breastfeeding Education and Support

- TMC's Breastfeeding Classes, Support Group, and Services: (520) 324-5730 tmcaz.com/ breastfeeding-support-services
- Milk and Honey: (520) 477-7752 milkandhoneytucson.com
- Mama's Latte: (506) 628-4202 mamaslatte.com
- La Leche League: llli.org Arizona: lllofaz.org

## Newborn Care and Parenting Support: (520) 324-1817

- TMC New Parent Guide: tmcaz.com/guide-fornew-parents
- See TMC Handout: Baby Care ABC, Car Seat, and Postpartum Depression Support Groups and Classes
- The Period of Purple Crying: purplecrying.info

## Counseling, Mental Health and Behavioral Therapy

- Try contacting your insurance for providers
- Pima County Crisis Line: (520) 622-6000 - Non-emergency behavioral health calls: HOPE, Inc. Warm Line (520) 770-9909
- Brian J. Ramirez, PsyD, NP: (506) 293-1445
- 2-1-1 Arizona: 2-1-1 or 1 (877) 211-8661 211arizona.org
- COPE Community Services: copecommunityservices.org
- CODAC Behavioral Health Services: (520) 327-4505 codac.org
- La Frontera, Arizona: (520) 838-3804 lafronteraarizona.com
- Tucson Counseling: (520) 873-8562 tucsoncounseling.org

## Doulas

- doulamatch.net
- Tucson Doulas: (520) 749-0329 tucsondoulas.com
- Blessed Birth: (520) 307-5393 haveablessedbirth.com

## Support Belts

- Pregnancy
- Hanger Clinic: (877) 442-6437 hangerclinic.com
- It's You Babe Pregnancy Cradles amazon.com or itsyoubabe.com
- AZMED Maternity Belt
- Less expensive option for light support amazon.com
- Support Belts also available at Walmart, Target, pharmacies, and TMC Desert Cradle Gift Shop
- PostPartum
- To be used in conjunction with daily abdominal exercises
- Mama Strut amazon.com or Mamastrut.com

Thank you for reading Y our Pregnancy Resource Guide. We hope you found this guide helpful and useful.

Please feel free to contact the office with any questions or concerns.

<!-- image -->

(520) 795-8188

5201 E. Grant Road • Tucson, AZ 85712