<!-- image -->

## Pregnancy and Me From Bump to Baby

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

A picture, photo and word based document to support you in your pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

This book is for women who are pregnant. It will talk about your changing body shape and what may happen during the next 9 months, or 40 weeks.

<!-- image -->

Women are usually pregnant for about 9 months. Your Midwife or Health worker can support you with any questions you may have or any words you don't understand. You can find a list of contacts at the back of this booklet .

<!-- image -->

If you are trying to have a baby or as soon as you know you are pregnant it is important that you start taking a vitamin called folic acid. This is to help protect your baby from something called spina bifida .

2 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

3 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

It is also important that you talk to your doctor if you have to take any medication for anything, especially if you have epilepsy or Diabetes for example. The doctor will make sure that you are on the safest medicine to help protect your baby from harm.

Smoking and drinking alcohol can be harmful for your baby. It is better to stop as soon as you find out you are pregnant.

If you want some help to stop smoking talk to your Midwife, Learning Disability Nurse or your Doctor .

## Your First Appointment

Sherwood Forest Hospitals NHS

NHS Foundation Trust

## Pregnancy and Me FromBump to Baby

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Apicture,photo and word based documenttosupport peoplewithlearningdisabilitiesthroughthetermoftheir pregnancy.

1 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

4 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

This book may have been given to you during your first appointment with the Midwife. This appointment was called your booking appointment.

The midwife will also have given you other information books called hand held records. These books must go to all your health appointments. They tell the health professional how best to care for you and your baby .

Your booking appointment should happen before you are 10 weeks pregnant. You will be asked lots of questions about your health and your family. These questions are so the Midwife can talk to you about staying healthy during your pregnancy.

5 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The Midwife will also need to take some of your blood. The blood is needed to check your iron levels, your blood group, and whether you have any other infections like HIV or Hepatitis B. Your Midwife and health worker can talk to you more about what this means.

Your Midwife will also ask you to give them a wee sample for them to check for any infections. They will also take your blood pressure and make an appointment at the hospital for you to have a scan.

The Midwife will check how much you weigh and how tall you are. This helps the Midwife to decide if you need some extra checks in your pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The Midwife will talk to you about other tests you can have during your pregnancy. You do not have to have these tests but it is important to talk about this with someone.

When you are pregnant it is important that you keep healthy. Your Midwife may tell you about taking extra vitamins and about having injections to protect both you and your baby against flu and whooping cough.

Your body goes through lots of changes during pregnancy. You may be feeling hot, faint, sick, tired, upset. You may have backache, headaches, find it difficult to go to the toilet for a poo, have swollen hands and feet, indigestion or heartburn. If you are worried about any of these you must tell your Midwife or health worker.

## The Scan

Note to supporting Midwife - Please use alongside the NHS Puplic Health England screening tests for you and your baby

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

7 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

Your first scan should happen at around 12 weeks of being pregnant. Most often it will happen at the hospital you have chosen to give birth to your baby. If you live in Newark you can have your scan at Newark Hospital

The machine used to scan your baby does not hurt. You will be asked to lift up your top to show your tummy. Some clear gel will be put on your tummy. The person doing the scan is called a Sonographer.

The Sonographer will hold a small piece of equipment like a camera, and rub this over your tummy. This will show your baby on a computer screen. It will measure your baby's size and can tell the Sonographer when your baby's due date could be.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The scan can also see if you are having more than one baby. You can also be given a photo of your baby to take home with you for around £4.

You can choose to have a blood tests which are known as screening tests. Your Midwife will give you an easy to read booklet on these.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Your baby by week 12 should be about 5cm long, and weigh about 14g. On occasions the scan can show that your baby has not developed the way it should have done. If this has happened the Sonographer will talk to you about it, and what will happen next.

You will have your next scan at 20 weeks of being pregnant. This scan will check that your baby is growing and can check for any problems. Your Midwife or health facilitator can talk you through these.

At this scan it is sometimes possible to tell if the baby is a boy or a girl. If you want to know this you can ask the Sonographer.

<!-- image -->

You may not even be able to tell from the outside of your body that you are pregnant at the time of your first scan. Over the next few weeks your body will start to show signs of being pregnant. You may like to take a photo of your body often, so you can see how much your tummy is growing with your growing baby.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

12 weeks

16 weeks

11. Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

13 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

The Midwife will also listen to your baby's heartbeat. This is similar to the scan but with no computer. Gel will be put onto your tummy and the Midwife will rub a microphone over it. You will be able to hear the heartbeat too. It does not hurt

The Midwife will need to write in your notes. You will see the Midwife again at around 24 weeks, 28 weeks, 31 weeks, 34 weeks, 36 weeks and 40 weeks of your pregnancy. The Midwife will feel the position of your baby at these appointments.

You may need to have other appointments. For example, if you or a family member are diabetic, or if you have a rare blood type. These appointments may happen in the hospital. Your Midwife will tell you if you need extra appointments.

<!-- image -->

You will need to go for regular health appointments throughout your pregnancy. These are called antenatal check ups.

<!-- image -->

Your next appointment after the scan will be when you are 16 weeks pregnant. The Midwife will go through the blood tests you had in your booking appointment. The midwife will do your blood pressure and test your wee again.

<!-- image -->

Sometimes you may have started to feel your baby moving. At 16 weeks it can feel like bubbles in your tummy.

Sometimes things can happen that mean you need to the Midwife straight away. These could be:

If you are getting strong pains in your tummy or head

If you are in the last few weeks of your pregnancy and you notice that you feel wet all the time or have a big gush of water from your vagina

14 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

If you are past 28 weeks of your pregnancy and your baby stops moving the way it has been

If you are worried about anything then please ring the emergency number that your Midwife has given you. A Midwife will talk to you at any time of the day or night and they will not mind that you have called

## Preparing for Birth

<!-- image -->

When your baby is due to be born, this is called Labour. Labour is different for all women. Your Midwife can talk you through different techniques that may make it easier for your baby to be born.

## You may choose to have pain relief if the pain gets too much:

<!-- image -->

You can have Gas and Air

<!-- image -->

Diamorphine: An injection into you thigh

16 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Epidural: Which is an injection into your spine.

Sometimes the doctors may need to help you give birth to the baby. Your Midwife will talk to you about this.

You can make a birth plan to help you.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Think about how you plan to feed your baby. This will help you to know what you need. Your Midwife will talk to you about the options.

You can also make a list of what you will need for you and your baby using the pictures on the next page.

<!-- image -->

Nappies

<!-- image -->

Clothes for you

<!-- image -->

Cotton wool

Baby Clothes

<!-- image -->

Breast pads

<!-- image -->

## The First Few Days After The Birth of your Baby

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

You will have some after pains.

Your Breasts will be larger and sensitive.

You will feel tired.

20 Developed by Ruth Harrison Learning Disability Specialist Nurse NHS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

You may feel sad.

You need to talk about c ontraceptives with your Doctor.

Your baby will need to have some tests. Your Midwife will talk to you about this.

<!-- image -->

## Contacts

Midwife

Health Visitor

Hospital

Sure Start

Specialist Nurse

Thanks to Change Picture Bank, Somerset total communications, NHS photo Library and Ruth Harrison's family photos.