<!-- image -->

## Diabetes  and Pregnancy

## Gestational Diabetes

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

## What is

## gestational diabetes?

Gestational (jes-stay-shuh-nal) diabetes is diabetes that a woman can develop during pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

When you have diabetes, your body cannot use the sugars and starches (carbohydrates) it takes in as food to make energy. As a result, your body collects extra sugar in your blood.

We don't know all the causes of gestational diabetes. Some-but not all-women with gestational diabetes are overweight before getting pregnant or have diabetes in the family. From 1 in 50 to 1 in 20 pregnant women has gestational diabetes. It is more common in Native American, Alaskan Native, Hispanic, Asian, and Black women, but it is found in White women, too.

## Gestational diabetes can be controlled.

Work with your doctor to make a plan to keep your blood sugar in control. (See pages 7 and 8 for upper and lower levels.) Following this plan can help you have a healthy pregnancy and baby. It also can help you and your baby stay healthy after birth.

## Gestational diabetes

can affect your baby.

## Gestational diabetes that is not controlled can cause your baby to

- Grow	very	large	(weigh	more	than	9	pounds),	which in turn can lead to problems with the delivery of your baby. A large baby born through the birth canal can injure nerves in his shoulder; break her collarbone; or, rarely, have brain damage from lack of oxygen. A
- Have	quickly	changing blood sugar after delivery. Your baby's doctor will watch for low blood sugar after birth and treat it if needed.
- Be	more	likely	to	become overweight or obese during childhood or adolescence. Obesity can lead to type 2 diabetes.*
*  Type 2 diabetes is a condition in which the body either makes too little insulin or can't use the insulin it makes to use blood sugar for energy. Often, type 2 diabetes can be controlled through eating a proper diet, exercising regularly, and keeping a healthy weight.  Some people with type 2 diabetes have to take diabetes pills or insulin, or both.

<!-- image -->

## Gestational diabetes

## can affect you.

## Gestational diabetes that is not controlled can cause you to

- Have	problems	during	delivery.
- Have	a	very	large	baby	and	need	to	have	a	cesarean section (C-section) (an operation to get your baby out through your abdomen).
- Take	longer	to	recover	from	childbirth	if	your	baby	is delivered by C-section.

## Other problems that sometimes happen with gestational diabetes

- Women	with	gestational	diabetes	also	can	develop preeclampsia* (pree-e-klamp-see-uh).
- Sometimes,	diabetes	does	not	go	away	after	delivery	or comes back later after pregnancy. When this happens, the diabetes then is called type 2 diabetes.

## Work with your doctor before, during, and after pregnancy to prevent problems.

* Preeclampsia is a problem that happens among some women during pregnancy. Women with preeclampsia have high blood pressure; protein in their urine; and, often, swollen feet, legs, fingers, and hands. Preeclampsia can harm you by causing seizures or a stroke.  It might also cause your baby to be born early.

## Now is the time

## to keep you and your baby healthy.

It is important during your pregnancy to keep your blood sugar under control. Here's how:

<!-- image -->

## See your doctor regularly

- Ask	your	doctor	if	you	need	to	see	him	or	her	more often because of your diabetes.
- Work	with	your	doctor	and,	together,	you	will	be	able to catch problems early, or even prevent them entirely.

<!-- image -->

## Eat healthy foods and stay active

- Work	with	a	dietitian	or	diabetes	educator	to	develop a diabetes meal plan for yourself. Learn what to eat to keep your blood sugar under control.
- Stay	active	to	help	keep	your	blood	sugar	under control. Exercise regularly-before, during, and after pregnancy. Moderate exercise, such as a brisk walk, 30 minutes a day, 5 days a week is a good goal if it is okay with your doctor.

3

## Take your medicines

- Follow	your	doctor's	advice.
- Take	your	medicines	as	directed.

## Monitor your blood sugar often

- Be	aware	that	your	blood	sugar	can	change	very quickly,	becoming	too	high	or	too	low.	What	you	eat, how much you exercise, and your growing baby will change your blood sugar many times during the day.
- Check	your	blood	sugar	often-as	directed	by	your doctor, and any time you have symptoms.
- Know	what	blood	sugar	levels	mean.	Learn	how	to	adjust what you eat; how much you exercise; and, if prescribed, how much insulin* to take depending on your blood sugar tests.

<!-- image -->

## Control and treat low blood sugar quickly

- Check	your	blood	sugar	right	away	if	you	have symptoms.	(See	page	9.)
- Treat	low	blood	sugar	quickly.	Always	carry	with	you a	quick	source	of	sugar,	like	hard	candy	or	glucose tablets.
- Wear	a	medical	alert	diabetes	bracelet.
* Insulin is usually made in the body and helps change sugars and starches into energy. If the body doesn't make enough insulin or can't use the insulin it makes, extra insulin is given in a shot.

## Stay healthy

## after the birth of your baby.

Gestational diabetes goes away after pregnancy, but sometimes diabetes stays. It's important to be checked for diabetes after your baby is born. About half of all women who have gestational diabetes get type 2 diabetes later in life.

## After pregnancy and in the future

-  Make sure to ask your doctor about testing for diabetes soon after delivery and again 6 weeks after delivery.
-  Continue to eat healthy foods and exercise regularly.
-  Have regular checkups and get your blood sugar checked by your doctor every 1 to 3 years.
-  Talk with your doctor about your plans for more children before your next pregnancy.
-  Watch your weight. Six to twelve months after your baby is born, your weight should be back down to what you weighed before you got pregnant. If you still weigh too much, work to lose 5% to 7% (10 to 14 pounds if you weigh 200 pounds) of your body weight.
-  Plan to lose weight slowly.  This will help you keep it off.

<!-- image -->

Eating healthy, losing weight and exercising regularly can help you delay or prevent type 2 diabetes in the future. Talk with your doctor to learn more.

## Monitoring  Your Blood Sugar

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) says you should try to keep your blood sugar below these levels:

ACOG

The levels my doctor recommends

Recommendations

Before meals

95 mg/dL or lower

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

130 mg/dL or lower

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

- 1 hour after eating

120 mg/dL or lower

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

- 2 hours after eating

Blood sugar is measured in milligrams/deciliter (mg/dL)

Your doctor might recommend different blood sugar levels. Ask your doctor to write in the chart above the levels you should have.

## High blood sugar

Your blood sugar is high when the numbers are 130 mg/dL or higher. High blood sugar can

- Make	you	thirsty

- Make	it	hard	to	pay	attention

- Cause	headaches

- Blur	your	vision

- Make	you	go	to	the bathroom often to urinate (pee)

- Make	you	feel	weak	or	tired

- Cause	yeast	infections

Talk with your doctor if you notice any of these signs or symptoms. Call your doctor if your blood sugar is greater than \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (Ask your doctor to write the levels).

My doctor's name:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Phone number:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Low blood sugar

Your blood sugar is low when the numbers are 70 milligrams/ deciliter or less. Low blood sugar is also called hypoglycemia (hipoh-gli-see-me-ah). Low blood sugar can

- Make	you	feel	hungry
- Cause	headaches
- Make	you	feel	dizzy	or	shaky
- Cause	you	to	feel	confused
- Make	you	look	pale
- Make	you	sweat
- Cause	weakness
- Make	you	feel	anxious	or cranky
- Make	your	heart	feel	like	it's beating too fast

If you notice any of these signs or symptoms, check your blood sugar. If it	is	low,	eat	or	drink	a	source	of	quick	sugar-like	a	piece	of	hard	candy or 4 ounces of a fruit juice, skim milk, or a soft drink (not diet). Check your blood sugar again in 15 minutes. If it's not better, eat or drink a source	of	quick	sugar	again.	When	you	feel	better,	have	a	protein	snack like cheese and crackers or half a peanut butter sandwich. Talk with your doctor if you have two or more low blood sugars during 1 week.

Call your doctor if \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (Ask your doctor to fill in.)

- See your doctor regularly ✓

- Check your blood sugar as directed ✓

- Take your medicine as directed ✓

- Eat a healthy diet ✓

- Exercise and be active ✓

## Remember!

## eek of W Diabetes Logbook:

opy ess.  C r t r s s, o es ln e, il s ci n diet, exer ts o en mm dd co et.  A g a r ur t o w y elo r b e o v o b e a u'r o e y im h t ac t e l u es r r uga d s o lo le b c Cir

. r uga od s lo ur b o f y k o rac ep t e o k t t d i ee u n o s y es a im y t n a s m t a ar h e c h t

ff). id o a s g l od tin o et in f a d g t n t cer a usb u o t h b u ts a bo en n a mm cer d co n n s (co s a es r l t ea r s le: m t); o a p o m hr r exa e t or r, fo d s uga n er a d s ev loo s (f ur b es ln o l ge in y han ade a c d fast x 30 min); i e m lke v t ha e (wa s t migh erci ha r); ex g t uga hin d s yt o n lo t a b r  o ep ice = f r p o ts: R mmen u o C (1/2 c *

<!-- image -->

| Medicines ou take y   | Medicines ou take y   |       |           | Medicines you take   |         |         |                       |           |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|-------|-----------|----------------------|---------|---------|-----------------------|-----------|
| Other                 | Other                 |       |           | Medicines you take   | Other   | Other   |                       |           |
| Bedtime               | Bedtime               |       |           | Medicines you take   | Bedtime | Bedtime |                       |           |
| Dinner                | After                 |       |           | Dinner               | After   |         |                       |           |
| Dinner                | Before                |       |           | Dinner               | Before  |         |                       |           |
| Lunch                 | After                 |       |           | Lunch                | After   |         |                       |           |
| Lunch                 | e Befor               |       |           | Lunch                | Before  |         |                       |           |
| eakfast Br            | After                 |       |           | eakfast Br           | After   |         |                       |           |
| eakfast Br            | Before                |       |           | eakfast Br           | Before  |         |                       |           |
|                       | Date                  | ime T | Comments* | Date                 |         | ime T   | eadings Blood sugar r | Comments* |

http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/bd/diabetespregnancy.htm 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) flo@cdc.gov

Order	Number:	21-1095

http://www2.cdc.gov/ncbddd/faorder/orderform.htm