<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

-

<!-- image -->

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

## MOTHER AND CHILD PROTECTION CARD

<!-- image -->

paste photo of child here

Is the pregnancy high risk?

## FAMILY IDENTIFICATION

Age

Mother's name

Father's name

Address

Mobile Number Mother

Father

MCTS/RCH ID

Bank &amp; Branch Name

Account No. &amp; IFSC Code

Date of last menstrual period

Expected date of delivery

No. of pregnancies / previous live births

Last delivery conducted at

Current delivery

## PREGNANCY RECORD

Child's Aadhaar  No.

Mother's Aadhaar No.

SHC / Clinic

ANM Contact No.

Hospital Contact No.

AWC Reg No.

Date

Sub-center Reg. No.

Date

Referred to

PHC / Town

Hospital / FRU

ASHA

ANM

AWW No.

Block/Village/Ward

## INSTITUTIONAL IDENTIFICATION

Ambulance Toll Free Number

:- \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Child's Name

Date of Birth

Birth Weight

Birth Registration No.

Male Female

## BIRTH RECORD

MCTS/RCH ID (Child)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Heart

Lungs

Breasts

(check for inverted nipple)

ANTENATAL VISITS

ABDOMINAL EXAMINATION

EXAMINATION

ESSENTIAL INVESTIGATIONS

OPTIONAL INVESTIGATIONS

1

2

3

4

5

Date

Any complaints

POG (Weeks)

Weights(Kg)

Pulse rate

Blood Pressure

Pallor

Oedema

Jaundice

Hemoglobin

Urine albumin

Urine sugar

Urine Pregnancy Test

HIV Screening

Syphilis

Ultrasonography

Gestational diabetes Mellitus

Fundal height Weeks/

cm

Lie/Presentation

Fetal movements

Normal/

Reduced/

Absent

Normal/

Reduced/

Absent

Normal/

Reduced/

Absent

Normal/

Reduced/

Absent

Fetal heart rate per

minute

P/V if done

1. Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone

2. Hbs Ag.

3. Blood sugar.

Blood Group &amp; Rh Typing

Date

Date

Date

Date

(under PMSMA)

## ANTENATAL CARE

A. APH

A. Tuberculosis

C. PIH

C. Heart Disease

- [ ] B. Eclampsia

- [ ] B. Hypertension

D. Anaemia

D. Diabetes

F. PPH

- [ ] F. Others

- [ ] E. Obstructed labor

- [ ] E. Asthma

- [ ] G. LSCS

- [ ] I. Others

- [ ] H. Congential anomaly

- [ ] in baby

OBSTETRIC COMPLICATION IN PREVIOUS PREGNANCY

(Please tick (     ) the relevant history)

PAST HISTORY

(Please tick (     ) the box of the appropriate response/s)

Participate in monthly fixed village Mother Child Health &amp; Nutrition Day

<!-- image -->

## POST NATAL CARE

Date of delivery

Term/Preterm/Spontaneous abortion

Sex of baby

*Weight of baby

If at institution period of stay post delivery

Initiated exclusive breast feeding within 1 hour of birth

Injection Vitamin K

*(Three extra visits if birth weight &lt; 2.5kg)

Complications, if any (Specify)

Cried immediately after birth

Place of delivery

Type of delivery

kg.

gms

CS

N.

- [ ] Assisted

M

Y

Y

Y

F

N

N

N

<!-- image -->

## POST PARTUM CARE

|                                      | 1 st Day   | 3 rd Day   | 7 th Day   | 6 th Week   |
|--------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|-------------|
| Any complaints                       |            |            |            |             |
| Pallor                               |            |            |            |             |
| Pulse rate                           |            |            |            |             |
| Blood pressure                       |            |            |            |             |
| Temperature                          |            |            |            |             |
| Breasts Soft/engorged                |            |            |            |             |
| Nipples Cracked/normal               |            |            |            |             |
| Uterus Tenderness Present/ absent    |            |            |            |             |
| Bleeding P/V Excessive/normal        |            |            |            |             |
| Lochia Healthy/foul smelling         |            |            |            |             |
| Episiotomy/Tear Healthy/ injected    |            |            |            |             |
| Family planning Counselling          |            |            |            |             |
| Any other complications and referral |            |            |            |             |

## CARE OF BABY

|                                | 1 st Day   | 3 rd Day   | 7 th Day   | 6 th Week   |
|--------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|-------------|
| Urine passed                   |            |            |            |             |
| Stool passed                   |            |            |            |             |
| Diarrhoea                      |            |            |            |             |
| Vomiting                       |            |            |            |             |
| Convulsions                    |            |            |            |             |
| Activity (good/lethargic)      |            |            |            |             |
| Sucking (good/poor)            |            |            |            |             |
| Breathing (fast/difficult)     |            |            |            |             |
| Chest indrawing Present/absent |            |            |            |             |
| Temperature                    |            |            |            |             |
| Jaundice                       |            |            |            |             |
| Condition of umbilical stump   |            |            |            |             |
| Skin pustules present/absent   |            |            |            |             |
| Any other complications        |            |            |            |             |

Your baby should be breastfed on

demand both during the day and

night. Frequent feeding increases

breast milk flow.

<!-- image -->

Your baby has a small and tender stomach that only need mother's

breast milk. Sometimes, your baby cries because he/she wants to

be held close. Keep your baby in close contact with your skin. While

breastfeeding, smile, talk and look into your baby's eyes, but don't rock

Mother's first yellow milk protects

Put your baby to your breast immediately him/her while feeding.

Even in your baby's illness, continue to

Breast milk provides all nutrients and breastfeed till 6 months

contains sufficient water. Do not give your

Consult the ANM, ASHA and AWW worker of your area in case you have any problem in

Breastfeeding improves intelligence

After 6 months, your baby requires small frequent meals, along with breast milk and

baby anything else to eat or drink, not even honey or water in the first 6 months

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Birth to 6 months:

Early and exclusive breastfeeding the baby

after birth, definitely within 1 hour. This helps in establishing lactation and bonding

breastfeeding your baby other liquids during illness

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Begin to recognize the mother's face

Develop social smile

Make eye contact

Hang colourful moving



Cuddle and play with



Avoid use of digital media



Talk to babies in your



By 2-3 months

<!-- image -->

objects 30cm (1 foot)

babies daily. Cuddling or away, for babies to focus

quickly responding to each on and follow

cry does not spoil babies in children younger than

mother tongue daily

24 months on the card as per the age of the child



or



ANM please examine and mark

At 3 months

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Attempt to reach and

grasp an object

Laugh aloud or make squealing

sounds



Take children outdoors,



and introduce them to the outside world

Children suck on their fingers and thumb for



Put interesting things on the floor for babies to reach out and explore

<!-- image -->

oo ah ee

Begin to babble 'ah, ee, oo' other than

Keep head steady when held upright

Like to look at self in a mirror

Turn head towards direction of sound on the card as per the age of the child



or



ANM please examine and mark comfort. It is not a cause

when crying and can sit with support

for concern. Do not stop this at an early age

At  6 months

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Roll over in both directions

<!-- image -->

Play games like peek-a-boo.

Hide the children's favourite toys under a cloth or box. See

if children can find it

By 7-9 months

<!-- image -->

At  9 months

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

By 10-12 months

<!-- image -->

At 12 months

<!-- image -->

By 18 months

<!-- image -->

At  18 months

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Provide opportunities for children to walk, run and

climb in safe environments

<!-- image -->

daily routine such as sleeping

Allow children to imitate and waking up at a fixed time

Read aloud to children, often



you and master their skills. Be patient with

repeating stories. Provide books and paper, chalk,

them if they make a mess

By 24 months

<!-- image -->

Encourage children to follow a



colours, etc. for scribbling on the card as per the age of the child



or



ANM please examine and mark

Does not use two word phrases such as 'give

Give milk,

Cannot scribble

Does not walk steadily while pulling

milk'

amma come…

a toy

Bittoo, give me the block

Pinky, show me your nose

Bye-bye

Does not make

Does not seem to understand and follow

Does not point to simple instructions

body parts appropriate response

to gestures such as responding to bye-bye/

namaste

By 3 years

<!-- image -->

At  3  years

<!-- image -->

Maintaining spacing of 3 years between two children has a healthy impact on both the mother and baby`s health. You can avail any spacing method from the wide basket of choices offered under the Family Planning Programme such as:

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Combined Oral contraceptive pills (Mala

Condoms

N, Mala D)

Centchroman (Chhaya, Saheli)

Progesterone-only pill

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Injectable MPA (Antara programme)

<!-- image -->

## Important things to remember:

1. Provide iron folic acid (IFA) syrup every Wednesday and Saturday
2. Give 1 ml of Iron folic acid syrup using the auto-dispenser
3. Don't give iron syrup to a child when s/he is sick or severly undernourished
4. Always give iron folic acid syrup to the child after consumption of food
5. One 50-ml iron folic syrup bottle lasts for six months and once its finished, contact your ASHA/ANM didi for a new bottle
6. After providing a dose of iron folic acid syrup, mark a tick in the card
7. In case of any problem after consumption of iron folic acid syrup, contact your ANM immediately

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Care

## r-age - Birth to 3 years

## hild Growth Standards)

<!-- image -->

uring Illness

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## r-age - Birth to 3 years hild Growth Standards)

<!-- image -->

9 MONTHS

3  1 / 2 MONTHS

2  1 / 2 MONTHS

1  1 / 2 MONTHS

BIRTH

Next Vaccination Date:

Next Vaccination Date:

Next Vaccination Date:

Next Vaccination Date:

Expected date of delivery

Neonatal Care

Please remember:

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

•  Keep the child warm.

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

hr after birth

1

•  Start breastfeeding within

•  Feed the baby only mother's milk

Do not bathe the child for the first 48 hours

•

MR-1

OPV-3

OPV-2

OPV-1

OPV-0

•  Keep the cord dry

•  Keep the child away from sick people

•  Special care if child &lt; 2.5 kg at birth.

JE-1

Penta-3

Penta-2

Penta-1

Hep B

give within

24h of birth

Danger signs:

Contact your health worker if the baby:

Vitamin

A-1

Rota-3

Rota-2

Rota-1

BCG

Is sucking weakly or refuses to breast feed

•

Is unable to cry or has difficulty in breathing

Has yellow palms and soles

•

•

Has fever or is cold to touch

•

PCV

booster

PCV-2

PCV-1

Has blood in stools or convulsions,

•

Is lethargic or unconscious

•

IPV-2

IPV-1

<!-- image -->

our child is

Y

Congratulations!

vaccinated for the 1 st  year of life.

<!-- image -->

SIA / OTHER

16 YEARS

10 YEARS

5-6 YEARS

16-24 MONTHS

DATE GIVEN

VACCINE

Next Vaccination Date:

Next Vaccination Date:

Next Vaccination Date:

(mm/dd/yyyy):

NAME

3)  What minor adverse events could occur and how to deal with them.

2)  When and where to come for the next visit

1)  What vaccine was given and what disease it prevents

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

DATE GIVEN

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

(mm/dd/yyyy):

TT

TT

DPT

Booster-2

DPT

Booster-1

Vitamin

A-2

MR-2

JE-2

OPV

Booster

FOUR KEY MESSAGES ON IMMUNIZATION

4)  To keep the immunization card safe and bring it along for the next visit

## Immunization Essentials

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| VACCINATION NAME                                                     | BIRTH   | 1 1/ 2 months   | 2 1/ 2 months   | 3 1/ 2 months   | 9 months   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------|
| BCG prevents tuberculosis                                            |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| HepB prevents liver disease                                          |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| OPV prevents polio                                                   |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| Penta prevents whooping cough, diphtheria, tetanus meningitis,& more |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| PCV prevents pneumonia                                               |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| Rota prevents diarrhoea                                              |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| MR prevents measles, rubella                                         |         |                 |                 |                 |            |
| JE fights brain fever                                                |         |                 |                 |                 |            |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

With your help, we have eradicated polio and eliminated maternal and neonatal tetanus!

During the 2 nd /3 rd  trimester of your pregnancy, avail at least one ANC checkup by a doctor on the 9 th  day of the month under the

'Pradhanmantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyaan'

Continue vaccinating your child. Thank You!

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->