<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## THE PREGNANCY FOOD GUIDE

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Developed by a scientific panel organized by the Brigham and Women's Hospital, a Harvard teaching affiliate.

This education material was supported by a grant from the Egg Nutrition Center.

<!-- image -->

## Weight Gain

- D Steady, gradual weight gain achieved through balanced and healthy nutrition is best for you and your baby
- D Pregnancy is not a time to lose weight
- D Consult with a health care provider right away if you have nausea, vomiting, lose your appetite or lose weight

## Introduction

What you choose to eat when you're pregnant may influence you  and  your  baby's  health  now  and  for  years  to  come. Pregnancy is a good time to review your nutrition.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Pregnancy Food Guide Chart

Stay energized.  Include p  rotein (like egg, poultry or fish), carbohydrate (like fruit, vegetables or c   e   real) and healthy fat (like olive oil or nuts) in e  v   e   ry meal &amp; snack

While awake, try to eat e  v   e   ry three hours

Enjoy healthy foods first and plan for an occasional tre   a   t

Drink plenty of water; Limit soda, coffee, juice drinks and other sweetened beverages

Try to be physically active at least 30 minutes each day. Avoid exercising on your b  a   c   k

E  v   e   ry pr egnancy is unique; Consult with a re   g   i   s   t   e   red dietitian (R.D.) for your personal nutrition needs

Eat enough for a healthy weight gain but you do not need to 'eat for two'

## BREAKFAST

- Whole grain cereal with berries, low fat milk o  r
- Low fat yogurt and granola, orange juice o  r
- Hard cooked egg, 2 slices whole grain toast, cut oranges, tomato juice

<!-- image -->

## DINNER

- Chicken, rice and beans, carrots, green salad o  r
- Fish, broccoli, sweet potato, three bean salad o  r
- Tofu, bowl of vegetables, buckwheat noodles, cucumber and tomato salad

## SNACKS

- Hard cooked egg with carrot sticks

o  r

- Whole grain cereal with low fat milk and berries

o  r

- Low fat cheese and pear

## Estimating Portion Sizes

<!-- image -->

FIST = 1 CUP (1 serving of cereal)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

HANDFUL = 1 OR 2 OZ. (1 serving of nuts)

PALM = 3 OZ. (1 serving of meat or fish)

THUMB = 1 OZ (1 serving cheese)

THUMB TIP = 1 TSP (1 serving mayonnaise)

## Healthy Protein

D Good sources of protein are chicken, turkey, fish, low fat dairy products, eggs, beans, nuts, peanut butter, lean meat, tofu

D Fish - Eat about 12 ounces, 2 average meals, a week of a variety of fish and shellfish that are lower in merc   u   ry. Five of the  most  commonly  eaten  fish  that  are  low  in  merc   u   ry  are shrimp, canned light tuna, salmon, pollock and catfish.

If you are not able to eat fish or choose not to, try eating other s   o   u   rces  of  DHA  including  walnuts,  wheat  germ,  canola  oil, flaxseed oil and omega 3 enriched eggs or consider taking a supplement with DHA

Groups Food

## LUNCH

- Turkey sandwich with lettuce, tomato on whole grain bread, low fat yogurt, apple,

o  r

- Taco with low fat cheese, greens, tomatoes and a side of beans, banana

o  r

- 1 slice pizza, salad, waterm   e   l   o   n

## Sample Meals a  n   d S  n   a   c   k  s

## SNACKS

- Pudding with nuts

o  r

- Low fat yogurt with fruit

o  r

- Hummus with carro t  s

## SNACKS

- Peanut butter on apples

o  r

- Low fat cheese and crackers

o  r

- Small handful of nuts and raisins

<!-- image -->

## Healthy Fats

- D Pregnant and breastfeeding women need healthy fats for baby's development
- D Eat healthy fats throughout the day such as fats found in olive and canola oil, fatty fish (salmon, herring and sardines), avocados, peanut butter, salad dressings, nuts and seeds
- D Avoid trans fat or foods with 'hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated fat' (like many packaged and processed foods, fried foods and fast foods)
- D Limit saturated fat (like butter, lard, whole milk dairy products, high fat meats such as sausage and bacon)

## Healthy Carbohydrates

- D Fruits and vegetables are healthy sources of carbohydrates. Eat them often and throughout the day. Try for five to nine servings a day. Eat dark and brightly colored fruits and vegetables because they are richer sources of vitamins and minerals. Choose whole fruit rather than juice whenever possible. Frozen and canned fruits and vegetables are acceptable. However, canned fruits in syrup are higher in sugar and canned vegetables are higher in salt.
- D Eat whole grain products including whole wheat bread, oatmeal, brown rice, whole grain pasta, seeded rye, barley, quinoa, wheat berries, bulgur, millet and kasha. Limit instant grains and refined carbohydrates (like cookies, soda, instant rice and instant oatmeal)

## Fluid

- D Drink enough water to never feel thirsty and so urine is light in color
- D Choose pasteurized low fat milk and lightly flavored waters
- D Limit juices and other sweetened beverages, which are high in calories

<!-- image -->

## Food Safety and Pre p a  r   a   t   i   o   n

- D When  you're  pregnant,  you're  at  an  increased  risk  for  foodborne  illness because hormonal changes during pregnancy weaken your immune system.
- D Remember to:
- Wash your hands before and after food preparation
- Cook well and properly handle meat, fish, eggs and poultry. Eggs should be cooked until firm.
- Wash fruits and vegetables well
- D Avoid:
- Unpasteurized brie, feta, camembert, blue cheese and all soft cheeses
- Shark, swordfish, king mackerel, tilefish and solid white albacore tuna because they contain mercury*
- Unpasteurized milk and juice
- Cold cuts (unless reheated to steaming hot)
- Cooked foods and foods requiring refrigeration that have been left unrefrigerated for more than two hours

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Nausea and Vomiting

- D P  regnancy isn't a time to lose weight. Consult with a health care pro   v   i   d   e   r right away if you have vomiting, lose your appetite or lose weight.
- D D  o   n   't stop eating. Try diff   e   rent textures (such as smooth pudding or a crunchy cere   a   l   ) and experiment with diff   e   rent tastes (such as sweet, salty or spicy). Pleasant smells such as lemons or orange peels may help reduce nausea.
- D Stay hydrated (try lemonade or ginger tea).

## Breastfeeding

- D Breast milk is the perfect food for babies
- D Most women will produce sufficient milk even if their diet is not perfect
- D The same nutrition recommendations apply to pregnant and nursing mothers: Eat well and stay hydrate d
- D Prenatal vitamins have more iron than breastfeeding mothers nee d. Breastfeeding women should consider taking a multivitamin-mineral supplement for non-pregnant women

## Multivitamin and Mineral Supplements

- D If you're planning to become pregnant, take a multivitamin and mineral supplement that includes at least 400 mcg of folic acid (to prevent birth defects) and 200-400 IU of Vitamin D
- D Once you're pregnant, ask for a prenatal vitamin and mineral supplement that includes 220 mcg of iodine and does not contain more than 30 mg of iron, unless your health care provider specifies otherwise
- D Check the package insert or ask your pharmacist to ensure the vitamin and mineral supplements meet recommendations
- D Take multivitamin and mineral supplements with meals to avoid stomach upset
- D Many dietary and herbal supplements are not safe during pregnancy
- D To get the calcium you need, drink 2- 3 cups of skim or low fat milk a day. If you can not or choose not to get your needed calcium through food, take a calcium supplement

<!-- image -->

## Choline

When consumed during pregnancy, choline may promote brain development and memory function early in life. The richest sources of choline are eggs, beef liver and chicken liver. One egg provides about half the recommended daily intake of choline for pregnant women.

<!-- image -->

Salt does not need to be restricted in pregnancy for most women. Foods that are less processed will contain less salt. To avoid excessive salt, limit intake of highly processed foods such as canned soups, boxed pasta and rice mixes, salted snacks, and salty seasonings.

## Dining O  u   t

<!-- image -->

Eating out can be challenging especially when you a  re  trying  to  eat  healthy.    Portion  control  is  key since  the  servings  at  most  restaurants  are oftentimes 2 to 3 times larger than at home. Use the p  o   rtion  guide  available  on page 3. Selecting  the right  restaurant  and  planning  ahead  are  important ways to eat out more healthfully.

<!-- image -->

- D Choose lean meats that are baked, broiled, D or grilled
- D Include vegetables and a whole grain starch like D brown rice or whole wheat pasta
- D Drink low fat milk as a beverage whenever D possible
- D Enjoy a fresh fruit cup for dessert
- D Limit foods that are fried and prepared in butter D or cream sauces
- D Be mindful of the calories from the bread basket.

## Sample Healthy Meals Out

- D Grilled chicken on salad greens with dressing on the side
- D Turkey breast with lettuce and tomato on a whole wheat ro   l   l   -   u   p
- D 2 slices of vegetarian pizza with a side green salad
- D Beef, chicken, or shrimp fajitas
- D Chicken or seafood stir- f ry  and specify 'light on the oil and sauces.'

## Can I get enough calcium if I do not drink milk?

Yes. In addition to milk, you can also get calcium in fortified orange juice, cheese, yogurt, sardines, soups cooked with bones or through a calcium supplement.

## Are artificial sweeteners safe to use while I am pregnant?

Yes, except saccharin.

## I am a vegetarian.  Do I have to eat meat?

There are many alternative sources of protein such as dairy products, soy beans and nuts. See a registered dietitian (R.D.) to address your individual needs.

## How can I reduce my constipation?

Drink 8 glasses of water a day.  Have 5-9 servings of fruits and vegetables a day.  Include whole grains in each meal and snack.  Be active every day.

## Can I eat spicy food while I am pregnant or breastfeeding?

Yes, if it is comfortable for you.  Spicy foods will not harm your baby.

## Can I have caffeine?

Limit your caffeine to 1 small cup of coffee (10 ounces) or 2 cups of light tea (20 ounces) a day.

## Can I eat eggs when I'm pregnant?

Yes. Eggs are a low-cost, nutritious food to eat when pregnant. Eggs provide the highest quality p rotein  available,  along  with  18  vitamins  and  minerals.  Eggs  are  also  an  excellent  source  of choline, a nutrient that, when consumed during pre g n a n c   y, may be key in the brain development and life-long memory capacity of your infant. As always, do not eat raw or undercooked eggs.

## How are my nutrition needs different if I am pregnant with twins?

You should eat a meal or snack every two hours while awake and consult with a registered dietitian (R.D.) about your individual needs.

I've heard I can't drink alcohol while I'm pregnant or breastfeeding. Is that true? Do not drink alcohol while you are pregnant. During lactation, if you choose to have a drink, wait a few hours before nursing.

## A  c   k   n   o   w   l   e  d   g   m   e   n   t   s

Developed by a scientific panel organized by the Brigham and Women's Hospital, a Harvard teaching affiliate. This education material was supported by a grant from the Egg Nutrition Center.

## SCIENTIFIC PANEL MEMBERS

Robert Barbieri, M.D. Chairman, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology Kate Macy Ladd Professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology Brigham and Women's Hospital

Jeffrey Blumberg, Ph.D. Professor, Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy Senior Scientist,USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging Tufts University

Kathryn G. Dewey, Ph.D.

Professor

Department of Nutrition

University of California, Davis

Miriam Erick, M.S., R.D. Senior Clinical Dietitian Department of Nutrition Brigham and Women's Hospital

Jane Hanrahan, M.S.,ICCE-CD President International Childbirth Education Association

Daniel Hoffman, Ph.D.

Assistant Professor of Nutritional Sciences Dept. of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers The State University of New Jersey

Barbara Luke, Sc.D., M.P.H., R.D. Professor of Nursing, Obstetrics &amp; Pediatrics School of Nursing and Health Studies University of Miami

Director of the Department of Nutrition

Kathy McManus, M.S., R.D. Brigham and Women's Hospital

Julie Redfern, R.D. Coordinating Nutritionist Department of Nutrition Brigham and Women's Hospital

W, Allan Walker, M.D. Conrad Taff Professor of Nutrition Professor of Pediatrics Director, Division of Nutrition Harvard Medical School

Walter Wlllett, M.D., Dr. PH.

Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition Chairman of the Dept. of Nutrition Harvard School of Public Health Professor of Medicine Harvard Medical