## Pages

EMLOYER &amp; EMPLOYEE RELATED 2-14

DEFINITIONS/KEY WORDS 15-24

LIST OF ESI BENEFITS &amp; CONTRIBUTORY CONDITIONS                       25-29

## FREQUENTLY

## ASKED

## QUESTIONS

ON

## ESI SCHEME

This booklet is only for awareness purpose and can't be referred/ quoted as legal document

## Index

## EMPLOYER &amp; EMPLOYEE RELATED

## 1.  What is ESI Scheme?

Employees' State Insurance Scheme of India is a multi-dimensional Social Security Scheme tailored to provide Socio-economic protection to the 'employees' in the organized sector against the events of sickness, maternity, disablement and death due to employment injury and to provide medical care to the insured employees and their families.

## 2. How does the scheme help the employees?

The scheme provides full medical care to the employee registered under the ESI Act, 1948 during the period of his incapacity, restoration of his health and working capacity. It provides financial assistance to  compensate  the  loss  of  his/  her  wages  during  the  period  of  his  abstention  from  work  due  to sickness,  maternity  and  employment  injury.  The  scheme  provides  medical  care  to  his/her  family members also.

## 3. Who administers the ESI Scheme?

The ESI Scheme is administered by a statutory corporate body called the Employees' State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), which has members representing Employers, Employees, the Central Government, State Government, Medical Profession and the Hon'ble Members of Parliament.

Director General is the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation and is also an ex-officio member of the Corporation.

## 4. What are the other bodies of the ESI Corporation?

At  the  National  level,  the  Standing  Committee  (a  representative  body  of  the  Corporation)  for administering the affairs of the Corporation, and the Medical Benefit Council, a specialized body that advises the Corporation on administration of Medical Benefit, are functioning.

At the Regional Level, the Regional Boards and Local Committees have been constituted to review the  functioning  of  the  scheme  and  make  suggestions  for  its  improvement.    In  addition  to  above, Hospital Development Committees have been set up for improvement of hospital and State Executive Committee for monitoring the performance of ESIS Hospitals and Dispensaries in a given State/UT.

## 5. How the Scheme is funded?

The ESI scheme is a self financing scheme. The ESI funds are primarily built out of contribution from employers  and  employees  payable  monthly  at  a  fixed  percentage  of  wages  paid.  The  State Governments also bear 1/8th share of the cost of Medical Benefit.

## 6.  Implemented Area

ESI Scheme is implemented in phases in different part of the country through Gazette notification after making the infrastructure available towards dispensation of medical as well as other benefits provided under the provisions of the Act to the prospective beneficiaries.

## 7. What are the establishments that attract coverage under ESI? In an area notified u/s 1(3) by Central Govt.?

In an area notified u/s 1(3) by Central Govt. all factories  where 10 or more persons are employed attract  coverage  under Section2(12)  of  ESI  Act.  Further,  according to  the  notification  issued  by  the appropriate Government (Central/State)  under  Section  1(5)  of  the  Act,  the  following  establishments employing 10 or more persons attract ESI coverage.

- (i)  Shops
- (ii)  Hotels or restaurants not having any manufacturing activity, but only engaged in 'sales'.
- (iii) Cinemas including preview theaters;
- (iv) Road Motor Transport Establishments;
- (v)  News paper establishments.(that is not covered as factory under Sec.2(12));
- (vi)  Private Educational Institutions (those run by individuals, trustees, societies or other organizations and Medical Institutions (including Corporate, Joint Sector, trust, charitable, and private ownership hospitals, nursing homes, diagnostic centers, pathological labs).

In  some  states  coverage  is  still  for  20  or  more  persons  employed  under  sec  1(5).  A  few  State Governments have not extended scheme to Medical &amp; Educational Institutions.

## REGISTRATION PROCEDURE

## 8. What is registration of Factory/ Establishment?

Registration is the process, by which every factory/ establishment, to which the Act applies, gets itself registered  online  for  compliance.  Otherwise  when  a  factory/  establishment  is  identified  by ESIC, it is asked to get itself registered under the Act.

## 9.  Is it mandatory for the Employer to register under the scheme?

Yes, it is the statutory responsibility of the employer under Section 2A of the Act read with Regulation 10-B, to register their Factory/ Establishment under the ESI Act within 15 days from the date of its applicability to them.

## 10. What is the procedure for Registration of an employer?

The Factory or Establishment to which the Act applies is to be registered by logging into

ESIC Portal i.e. www.esic.in  within 15 days from the date of its applicability to them The employer is supposed to sign up, providing factory/Establishment name, Address Principal employer's name, Bank Account, PAN, use of power in case of of factory ,State and region as well as e mail address. The employer trying to register would get a user ID and a password through his mail ID. The employer can log in to  www.esic.in .  His mail ID can also be used as user ID and the password received has to be accessed from the mail box can be used to register his unit by providing information in the Portal. Automatically a 17 digit code number is generated after successful registration.

## 11. What is a Code number?

It  is  a  17  digit  unique  identification  number  allotted  to  each  of  the  factory/establishment  registered under the provisions of the Act. Such a number is generated through ESIC portal on submission of the pertinent information by the employer. It can also be generated on receipt of Survey Report from the Social Security Officer.

## 12. What is a Sub-code number?

This  is  also  a  unique  identification  number  allotted  to  a  sub-unit,  branch  office,  sales  office  or Registered Office of a covered factory or establishment located in the same State or different State. The employer can register any Branch or Sales Office through ESIC Portal using his credentials and his unique primary registration code number.

## 13.  Can  a  factory  or  establishment  once  covered  go  out  of  coverage  if  the  number  of  persons employed therein goes down to the minimum limit prescribed?

Once  a  factory  or an  Establishment  is covered  under  the  Act, it  continues  to  be  covered notwithstanding the fact that the number of persons/ coverable employees employed therein at any time falls below the required limit or there is a change in the manufacturing activity.

## 14. Is there any provision for 'exemption of a factory or establishment' from ESI coverage?

Yes,  of  course  the  exemption  is  permissible  from  operation  of  provisions  of  the  Act  subject  to  the condition that the employees in a covered factory or establishment are other-wise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior to those provided under the ESI Act.

The appropriate Government may grant exemption to such factory or establishment for a period of one year at a time prospectively in consultation with ESI Corporation. An exempted application unit has to apply for renewal three months before the date of expiry of the prior exemption.

## 15. If the wages of an employee exceeds Rs. 21,000 in a month, can he be treated as not covered and deduction of contribution from his wages is stopped?

If  the  wages  of  an  employee  (excluding  remuneration  for  overtime  work)  exceeds  the  wage  limit prescribed  by  the  Central  Government  after  start  of  contribution  period,  he  continues  to  be  an employee till the end of that contribution period and the contribution is to be deducted and paid on the total wages earned by him.

## 16. What is the effect of increase in wages from a retrospective date?

In  case  the  wages  of  an  employee  is  increased  from  a  retrospective  date  resulting  in  crossing  the wage limit prescribed, its effect on coverage of that employee is only after expiry of the Contribution period  during  the  currency  of  which  such  increase  is  announced  or  declared.  The  contribution  on

enhanced wages is also payable from the month in which such increase is announced. There is no need  to  pay  the  contribution  on  the  arrears  for  the  period  prior  to  the  month  of  declaration/ announcement/ agreement.

## 17.  Why  contribution  should  be  paid  on  the  total  wages  beyond  the  wage  ceiling  limit  when  an employee crosses the wage limit prescribed by the Central Government?

An employee who crosses the prescribed ceiling limit in any month at any time after commencement of  the  contribution period, he/she would continue to be an employee till the end of that contribution period.  The   Rule position in this regard is mentioned as under:-

'As per Rule-50 of the Employee's State Insurance (Central) Rule 1950 any employee whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) exceed (fifteen thousand) rupees a month at any time after and not before the beginning of the contribution period, shall continue to be an employee until the end of that period.'

## 18. Why over-time is to be excluded for wage ceiling limit for coverage of an employee?

Overtime is not a regular and continuous payment, but it is of an occasional nature. If overtime is also taken for wage limit for coverage of an employee, he may be going out of coverage for some time and again coming within the ambit of the scheme, when overtime is not there. However, it is included for payment of contribution to cover the risk during the period he was on overtime work, and to enable him to draw cash benefits at an enhanced rate also.

## 19. Is there any provision for exemption from payment of Employer's contribution?

With effect from 1-4-2008, the wage ceiling limit for coverage of employees with disability (PWDs) had been raised to rupees twenty five thousand a month. To encourage the employers  to employ more employees with disability there is no wage ceiling for availing the ESI benefits w.e.f. 01.04.2016. The employer is  exempted from  payment  of  Employer's share  of  contribution  on  the  wages  paid  to  the employees with disability for a maximum period of 10 years from the date of commencement of the contribution period in which such employee with disability is employed. The Ministry of Social Justice &amp; Empowerment, GOI, shall reimburse this Employer's contribution to the ESI Corporation.

## 20. What is the time limit for  contribution?

Contribution  shall  be  paid  in  respect  of  an  employee  in  a  bank  duly  authorized  by  the  Corporation within 15 days of the last day of the calender month in which the contribution falls due for any wage period (Reg. 29 &amp; 31).

## 21. What is the manner of calculation and  payment of contributions?

The employer needs to file monthly contributions online through ESIC portal on a monthly basis in respect of all its employees after duly registering them. Through this exercise, the employer has to file employee wise number of  days for  which  wages  paid  &amp;  the  amount  of  wages  paid  respectively  to ascertain the amount of contributions payable.

ESIC has facilitated payment of ESI contribution online by Employer via the payment gateway of 58 banks in addition to SBI.

The total amount of contribution (both the shares) in respect of all the employees for each month is to be deposited in any branch of SBI by ONLINE generation of a challan through ESIC portal using his credentials.  ESIC  has  facilitated  payment  of  ESI  Contribution  online  by  employer  via  the  payment gateway of 58 banks in addition to SBI.

## 22. What are consequences of non / late payment of employees' contribution deducted but not paid?

Any sum deducted by the Principal employer from wages under the ESI Act shall be deemed to have been entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of paying the contribution in respect of which it was deducted as per Section 40 (4) of the ESI Act,1948. Non-payment or delayed payment of the Employee's contribution deducted from the wages of the employee amounts to ' Breach of trust' and is punishable under IPC 406, 409 and also an offence u/s 85 of ESI Act.

## 23. Will the delayed payment attract any interest?

An employer who fails to pay the contribution within the limit prescribed under Regulation 31, shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum in respect of each day of delay or default in payment of contribution ( Regulation 31-A).

## 24  What are the penal provisions for non-payment or delayed payment of contribution?

The Corporation may levy and recover damages under Reg. 31C at the following rates, not exceeding the amount of contribution payable for default or delay in payment of the contribution.

| Period of delay        | Rate of damages in %p.a.   |
|------------------------|----------------------------|
| i) Less than 2 months  | 5%                         |
| ii) 2 to 4 months      | 10%                        |
| iii) 4 to 6 months     | 15%                        |
| iv) 6 months and above | 25%                        |

The employer is liable for prosecution under Section 85(a) for the first time, Whoever, having been convicted by a court of an offence punishable under the Act, commits the same offence shall, for every such subsequent offence, liable for enhanced punishment under section 85 A of the Act.

## MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS

## 25. What are the records to be maintained for ESI purpose?

For ESI compliance the employer has to maintain following records:

1.  Muster roll, wage record and books of Account maintained under other laws.
2.   Accident Register in new Form-11 and
3.   An inspection book.
4.  The immediate employer is also required to maintain the Employees' Register for the  employees deployed to the principal employer.

## 26  What are the returns/ reports to be submitted by the employer?

The Employer has to submit following records:

- 1 Accident Report: Notice of Accident to the concerned Branch office in Form -12  should be submitted on-line within 24 hours.

2  Abstention verification Report: It is required to be submitted to the Branch office as and when it is sought by the Branch Manager in respect of any IP.

3. Records including attendance, wages and books of accounts etc. in respect of principal employer and records of immediate employer as required by the Labour Laws.

## REGISTRATION OF EMPLOYEES

## 27. What is Registration of an Insured Person?

Registration is the process of obtaining and recording information about the entry of an employee into 'insurable employment', for the purpose of his identification under the Act. The Employer before taking into employment shall register the insurable employee on-line. The employer will generate Temporary Identification Certificate (TIC).The TIC is valid only for 30 days.  If Aadhar number is seeded in TIC, it will become e-pehchan (Permanent Identification Certificate).

## 28. Why Registration of an Insured Person is necessary?

Registration of employee is the process of his entry in the insurable employment for identification to provide  the  benefits  under  the  Act  which  are  related  to  the  contributions  paid  by  the  employer  on behalf of each of the insured persons.

## 29. How are the employees registered under the Scheme?

At the time of joining the insurable employment, an employee is required to provide his and his family details to the employer along with a family photo so that the employer can register the employee online. This exercise of registering an employee is a one time exercise for entire insurable employment of an employee. The insurance number generated On-line on the first occasion of registration is to be used throughout his life time irrespective of change of employment including change of place.

## 30. What is an identity card?

After  On-line registration of an employee under the scheme, the employer can take a print out of the Temporary Identity Certificate (TIC). On linking of Aadhar with IP insurance number,  TIC will automatically  be  converted  into  a  Permanent  Identity  Card (PIC).  With  PIC  the  IP  and  his  family members can avail benefits under the ESI Scheme, without any hitch. If Aadhar number of IP/family is

not available, then employer will ensure to affix the  IP photo along with the family members on TIC duly authenticated with his stamp &amp; signature. This TIC will be valid for a period of one month only .

As soon as possible but not later than a month, the insured person along with his entire family should link their Aadhar number  using the web site www.esic.in  for  availing medical benefit at dispensary/ hospital  and  availing  cash  benefits  at  the  ESI  branch  Office.  Any  changes  in  his  residence/ dispensary/ employment can be carried out by the employer in the ESIC Portal as and when arises.

## MEDICAL BENEFIT

## 31. What is Medical Benefit?

Medical benefit means the medical attendance and treatment to the insured persons covered under the Act and their families as and when needed. This is the only benefit provided in kind through the State Governments including Model Hospitals run by ESI Corporation (except in Delhi), and uniformly to all as per their requirement without linking it to their wages and contributions.

## 32. What is the scale of Medical Benefit?

Full  range  of  Medical,  surgical  &amp;  obstetric  treatment  consisting  of  out-door  treatment,  in-patient treatment, supply of all drugs and dressings, pathological and radiological investigations, prenatal and post-natal  care,  super  specialty  consultation  &amp;  treatment,  ambulance  services,  provision  of  artificial appliances etc.

## 33. How long is Medical benefit available?

The insured person and his family are entitled to the Medical Benefit from the very first day of his/her joining the insurable employment. A person who is just covered under the scheme for the first time is eligible  for primary  and  secondary medical  care  for  self  and  family  for  three  months.  If  he/she continues  in  insurable  employment  for  three  months  or  more,  the  benefit  is  admissible  till  the beginning of the corresponding benefit period. If the insured person is in ESI coverage for at least 2 years from the date of Online Registration, contributed for not less than 156 days and IP  is eligible for Sickness Benefit in any one of   the contribution period  and is suffering from any of the 34 specified long term diseases, the medical benefit is admissible till the incapacity lasts or up to  730 days during a period of 3 years for self and family.

Further, If the insured person is in ESI coverage for at least 2 years from the date of Online Registration, contributed for not less than 156 days before the date of diagnosis and IP/IW is eligible for Sickness Benefit in at least  two  contribution period  then he along with his family members will be eligible  for  getting super specialty treatment. In case of an Accident in respect of IP/ IW himself or his/her family member this contributory condition shall not be applicable for SST treatment.

## 34 If the insured person's family is residing in another place in the same State or another State, how the family can avail the medical benefit?

If the family is residing in any other place either in the same State or a different State, based on the declaration of the insured person and certified by the employer, the family is provided with a 'Family Identity Card' for receiving medical benefit from ESI Dispensary in the area in which they are residing. After the commencement date of operation of  IT Roll Out w.e.f. 9.6.2011 the 'Family' is also issued a separate  'Pehchan  card'.  By  producing  this Aadhar  based Pehchan  card,  the  family  can  avail  the medical benefit from any ESI Dispensary/ Hospital either at their place of residence or in any other part  of  the  country.  There  is  also  provision  to  opt  two  dispensaries  to  avail  medical  facility  for  IP himself at work place and family members at their native place or other place.

## 35 How to get medical benefit when an insured person is leaving for another station for a temporary period?

Through  seeding  ''On-line  Aadhar  Card  and  Card  number'  in  respect  of  self  and  his/her  family members,  the  employee  would  be  able  to  get  medical  benefit  across  the  country  in  any  of  the ESIC/ESIS  dispensaries  subject  to  entitlement.  However,  for  getting  this  facility  with  ease,  it  is necessary to  keep Form-105 duly  filled up  and signed by their employers..

## 36. How long  Dependent Benefit is  paid and at what rate?

The rate of dependants' benefit is 90% of standard benefit rate of the wages of the deceased insured person. It is apportioned among the dependants as follows:

- 1) Widow: Till death or remarriage at 3/5th of the full rate.
- 2) Widowed mother till death @2/5th of the full rate,
- 3) to each child @ 2/5th of the full rate each till he attains the age of twenty -five years.
- 4) Unmarried daughters @2/5th of the full rate till they get married.

- 5) If the son or daughter is infirm and wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person at the time of his death, they continue to receive the benefit even after attaining the age of 25 years/ marriage as the case may be.

If  the  total  dependants'  benefit  for  all  the  dependents  worked  out  as  above  exceeds  at  any time, the full rate, the share of each of the dependents shall be proportionately reduced, so that the total  amount  payable  to  them  does  not  exceed  the  amount  at  full  rate.  In  case  deceased  Insured person does not leave behind any of the dependents referred above, then his parents will get 3/10 share or if  no  parent  is  alive  then  alive  his  paternal  grant  parent  will  get  3/10  share  of  Full  rate  of dependent benefit.

## 37. Whether the TDB/PDB/DB is also admissible in the case a casual or temporary employee meets with an employment injury on the very first day or on any day before he completes his first contribution period?

There  is  no  qualifying  conditions  or  contributory  conditions  are  attached  for  payment  of  temporary disablement benefit, permanent disablement benefit or Dependants benefit. Even if he/she meets with an employment injury on the very first day of his/her joining the insurable employment at workplace, the benefit is admissible.

## BENEFIT TO FAMILY

## 38  What is the benefit admissible to the family members?

## (i) Family members are also entitled to full medical care as and when needed

(ii)The  Family  members are also entitled  to  artificial  limbs,  artificial  appliances  as  a  part  of  Medical treatment.

(iii)The  medical  benefit  is  also  admissible  to  the  family  during  the  period  the  insured  person  is  in receipt of unemployment allowance. In case he/she dies during the period, his/her family continues to receive the medical benefit till receipt of unemployment allowance.

(iv)  In  case  of  the  death  of  the  insured  employee  due  to  employment  injury,  the  widow,  widowed mother and children are entitled to Dependants' benefit.

(v) The Funeral Expenses upto Rs. 10000/are defrayed to any family member or person who actually incurs the  above expenditure on funeral.

## BENEFIT AFTER RETIREMENT TO THE IPs under Rule 61

## 39. What is the benefit admissible after retirement of an employee?

An  Insured  person  who  superannuates  or  retires  under  a  voluntary  Retirement  Scheme  or  takes premature  retirement,  after  being  an  insured  person  for  not  less  than  5  years,  shall  be  eligible  to receive medical benefit for himself and his spouse subject to production of proof thereof, and payment of a nominal contribution of rupees one hundred and twenty for one year. In case the insured person expires his spouse shall continue to receive medical benefit under Rule 61 on payment of  contribution as mentioned above

## 40. What  is  the  benefit  admissible  to  an  Insured  Person  who  ceases  to  be  in  an  insurabe employment on account of permanent disablement?

(a )  An  Insured  person  who  ceases  to  be  in  insurable  employment  on  account  of  permanent disablement caused due to an employment injury shall eligible to receive medical benefit for himself and his spouse on payment of rupees one hundred and twenty for one year till the date on which he would have vacated the employment on attaining the age of superannuation, had he not sustained such permanent disablement.

Vocational  Rehabilitation  programme,  under  Rule  60  is  also  undertaken  for  Insured  Persons  age below 45 years and disability not less than 40% due to employment injury whereby the training to IPs is  imparted    in  Govt.  or  Govt.  accredited  Institutions  as  per  the  norms  of  Vocational  Rehabilitation centre. The IP is entitled to get the expenditure reimbursed as per the rate of the Centre or  Rs. 123/per  day  whichever  is  more    in  addition  to  the  conveyance  charges  at  a  normal  rate  /second  class Railway/bus fare as applicable to  attend such training programme.

## 41. Does the Widow who is in receipt of Dependent Benefit is eligible for medical care under the ESI Scheme?

Yes, The Corporation in its 161st meeting held on 28.1.2014 &amp; 14.2.2014 has passed the resolution to provide the medical care (excluding SST) to the widow for self,  who is in receipt of dependent benefit on payment of contribution of rupees one hundred and twenty for one year.

## 42  What is Rajiv Gandhi Shramik Kalyan Yojana?

Rajiv  Gandhi  Sharmik  Kalyan  Yojana  (RGSKY)  was  introduced  w.e.f.  01.04.2005  to  provide unemployment allowance to the  Insured  Persons  who  have  been  rendered  unemployed  due  to  (a)

Retrenchment as defined in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 (b) Closure of the factory/Establishment as defined in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 and (c) Permanent invalidity not less than 40% arising out of non employment injury.  The invalidity should be duly certified by a Medical Board constituted by the Central or State Government.

According to this scheme the IP would be entitled to unemployment allowance subject to two years of insurable  employment  with  78  days  contribution  in  each  contribution  period.  The  un-employment allowance is payable for 24 months in life time.   For the first 12 months the allowance will be paid @ 50% of the last average daily wages and thereafter @ 25% from 13 to 24 months.

The  IP/  IW  has  to  secure  admission  as  per  the  entry  norms  of  the  Government  or  Government accredited Institutions as per the norms of vocational Rehabilitation centre. The corporation will pay the entire Fee charged and will also reimburse second class to and fro Rail / Bus fare for the IP /IW who  has  to  travel  for  attending  th  f  e  training  programme  at  AVTI.  The  duration  of  such  training programme will be  upto one year only for IP. IP and their family member shall be eligible for medical care excluding Super Specialty Treatment.

## DEFINITIONS (KEY WORDS)

## 1.    What is the definition of a Factory for coverage under ESI Act?

Factory is defined under section 2(12) as 'any premises including the precincts thereof whereon ten or more persons are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which, a manufacturing process is being carried on or is ordinarily so carried on, but does not include a mine subject to the operation of Mines Act 1952 (35 of 1952), or a railway running shed.'

## 2.    Whether  the  persons  employed  who  are  not  coverable  under  the  Act  are  also  counted  for  the purpose of coverage of factory/ establishment?

Yes. All persons employed in the premises including the precincts thereof irrespective of their wages including  trainees,  casual  and  contract  employees  are  counted  for  the  purpose  of  coverage  of  the factory  /  establishment.  Even  the  Directors  rendering  service  and  receiving  remuneration  are  to  be counted.

## 3.  Persons who are not be counted for coverage of a factory?

The following persons are not to be counted

- a)  A proprietor or a partner whether drawing salary or not;
- b)  A contractor lending the services of his employees;
- c)  An apprentice engaged under the Apprentice Act, 1961;
- d)  Persons employed on contract for service, e.g. legal, technical, tax consultants etc;

## 4. What is meant by 'premises'?

The  terms  'Premises'  and  'Precincts'  used  under  section  2(12)  of  the  Act  have  not  been  defined adequately. According to the definition assigned to the 'premises' under Section 2(m) of the Factories Act,  1948,  it  is  a  generic  building,  or  shed.  Accordingly,  the  word  'precincts',  thereof  'separate buildings' located apart or at a distance when used for one continuous manufacturing process shall also  constitute  the  'Premises'.  Moreover  the  area  adjacent  to  the  building/shed  which  is  ordinarily accessible would constitute 'premises'. The 'premises' however need not be in a single unit. A number of buildings or even an open space or a shed might constitute premises.

## 5. What is Manufacturing Process?

Manufacturing process shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Factories Act, as per Section 2(14AA) of the Act. It is defined in section 2(k) of the Factories Act as 'any process for:-

(I) Making, altering repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, Oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise treating  or adopting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery, or disposal; or

- (ii) Pumping of oil water, or sewages, or any other; or
- (iii) Generating, transforming, or transmitting power; or
- (iv) Composing types for printing, by letter press, lithography, photogravure or other similar processes, or book binding; or
- (v) Constructing, reconstruction, repairing, refitting, finishing, or breaking up ships or vessel; or

(vi)Preserving or storing an article in cold storage; and

(vii)Tapping, collecting, cross matching and keeping in bottles, the blood, or whole human blood.

## 6. Who are the persons to be counted for coverage of an establishment?

The  words  'premises'  and  'precincts'  used  in  the  definition  of  'factory'  have  not  been  used  in  the notifications issued by the State Governments, while extending the provisions of the

Act  to  the  establishments  under  Sec.  1(5)  of  the  Act.  So  long  as  the  establishment  employs  a minimum prescribed number of persons it will stand covered under the Act whether these employees are employed at one place or at places away from each other, as they are engaged in the organized activity of the same establishment. Thus, all the persons including those working in branches, regd. office, and sales office etc. whether situated in implemented area or not, are to be counted.

## 7. Who is a Principal Employer?

U/S 2(17) Principal Employer means

- (A) In the case of a factory, any of the following:-
- (i)  Owner;
- (ii) Occupier;
- (iii)  Managing Agent of the owner or occupier;
- (iv) Legal representative of a deceased owner or occupier;
- (v)  Manager of the factory under the Factories Act, 1948.
- (B) In the case of Establishments belonging to or under the control of Government of India:
- (i) The Specified Authority
- (ii) The Head of the Department (In the absence of specified Authority).
- (C)  In  the  case  of  other  establishments:  Person  responsible  for  the  supervision  and  control  of  the establishment.
- (D) In case of shop -   i)(a) Owner     II) Proprietor   III) Partners     IV) Directors
- (b) Management of the Owner

## 8. Who is an Immediate Employer?

Under Section 2(13), an Immediate Employer can be any or all of the following:-

(i)    One  who  executes  any  work  inside  the  premises  of  the  principal  employer  of  a  factory  or  an establishment to which this Act applies or under the supervision of Principal Employer or his agent if the whole or any part of any work which is ordinary part of the work of the factory or Establishment of the Principal Employer or preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of, any such factory or establishment and include a person by whom the services of an employee who has entered into a contract of services with him or let on hire to the Principal Employer (and include a contractor).

(ii)    One  who  executes  the  work  of  a  factory  or  establishment  outside  the  premises  under  the supervision of its principal employer or his agent;

(iii)    One  who  lets  on  hire  the  services  of  his  employees  to  the  principal  employer  of  a  factory  or establishment; and

(iv)  A contractor under Section 2(13) of ESI  Act.

## 9. Who are the persons to be covered as 'Employees'?

Under Section 2(9) Any person employed for wages in or in connection with the work of a covered factory or establishment, and:

Directly employed by the Principal employer, on any work of the Factory or establishment within the premises or elsewhere, or in any part, department or branch dealing with administration, purchase of raw materials, sale or distribution of the products of the factory or establishment.

Employees of the immediate employer:

Employed in the premises on any work of the factory or establishment;

Employed outside the p\remises on any work of the factory or establishment under the supervision of the Principal employer or his agent;

Employees  lent  or  let  on  hire  to  the  principal  employer  on  any  work  of  the  factory,  or  employees/ professional on contract of service.

Paid Directors of a company.

Exclusions: (1) An Apprentice engaged under the Apprentice Act 1961 and (2) An employee drawing wages  above the ceiling for coverage prescribed by the Central Government. Employees/ Professionals rendering services for contract for service.

## 10. What is the wage ceiling limit prescribed for coverage of an employee?

The wage ceiling prescribed for coverage of an employee is Rs. 21,000 per month w.e.f  01.01. 2017.

However, there is no wage ceiling for coverage of an employee with 'disability' 01.04.2016.

## 1 1. What is 'Average Daily Wages'?

## Average daily wages (Central Rule):

1(A) "Average daily wages means  the aggregate amount of wages payable to IP/IW during that period divided by the  number of  days for which such wages were payable.

## 12. Who is an 'Exempted Employee'?

An employee who is not required to pay employees' contribution is called an exempted employee. The exemption limit with effect from 14.6.2016 is Rs. 137/- per day. However, employer's contribution is payable on these wages.

## 13. What are the contribution periods and benefit periods?

The  financial  year  from  April  to  March  has  been  divided  in  to  two  halves  six  monthly  contribution periods i.e. first half from 1st April to 30th September and second half from 1st October to 31st March of next year. The relevant benefit period corresponding to each contribution period commences three months after the end of the that contribution period i.e. Jan to June and July to December.

(The  calendar  year  from  January  to  December  has  been  divided  in  to  two  six  monthly  benefits periods).

## WAGES

## 14. How wages are computed for payment of contribution?

The  following  wage  components  are  taken  into  account  for  computation  of  wages  for  payment  of contribution.

- a)  Basic Pay,/Wages/Salary;
- b)  D.A/ HRA/ CCA/ Overtime/ officiating allowance/ Night shift allowance/ efficiency allowance/ Heat, Gas, Dust allowance/ Education allowance/ Food &amp; Tea allowance/ conveyance allowance; Overtime wages (but not to be taken into account for determining the coverage).
- c)  Wages/ salary/ pay for weekly off and public holidays;
- d)  Commission paid to sales staff;
- e)  Subsistence allowance paid to an employee during the period of suspension;
- f)  Attendance Bonus or incentive or exgratia in lieu of Attendance Bonus or production incentive;
- g)   Regular Honorarium or salary or remuneration paid to a Director;
- h)   Collection Bhatta paid to running staff. Production incentive, Bonus other than statutory bonus, night shift.  Heat, Gas &amp; Dust Allowance, Meal/Food Allowance.
- i)  Actual payments made towards leave salary, lay off compensation, or wages for strike period.
- j)    Any  other  remuneration  paid  or  payable  in  cash  to  an  employee  if  the  terms  of  contract  of employment, expressed or implied were fulfilled.

The above are only indicative.

## 15. What is 'Contribution'?

Contribution is the sum of money payable to the Corporation by the Principal employer in respect of an employee and includes any amount payable by or on behalf of the employee in accordance with the provisions of the Act (Section2(4)).

## 16  What is the Present Rate of Contribution?

Employer's contribution: A sum equal to 4.75% of the wages payable to an employee, rounded off to the next higher rupee;

b) Employee's contribution: A sum equal to 1.75% of the wages payable to an employee, rounded to the next higher rupee;

As per the  Notification published in  the  Gazette  of India  dated  6.10.2016,  in respect  of the areas  where  the  Act  is  implemented  for  the  first  time  the  rates  of  employer's  and  employee's contribution for the initial twenty-four months from such date  will be under :-

(a)  Employer's contribution-A  sum (rounded to the next higher rupee) equal to three percent of the wages payable to an employee; and

(b) Employee's contribution- A sum (rounded to the next higher rupee) equal to one  percent of the wages payable to an employee .

## 17. What is 'Sickness Benefit'?

If  an insured person requires medical treatment and attendance and needs abstention from work on medical grounds, Sickness benefit is paid for the period of abstention duly certified by the Authorized Medical Officer, for a period not exceeding 91 days in two consecutive benefit periods (say one year) @ 70% of standard benefit rate, subject to payment of contribution for not less than 78 days in the corresponding contribution periods.

## 18. What is Extended Sickness Benefits?

This  is  an  additional  sickness  benefit  provided  by  the  Corporation  in  exercise  of  its  powers  under Section 99 of the Act. An insured person who has completed two years of insurable employment and contributed for not less than 156 days during this period is entitled to extended sickness benefit for a period of 309 days for the 34 specified long term diseases. This period can be extended up to 730 days or till the insured person attains the age of 60 years whichever is earlier. The insured person and his family are also entitled to Medical Benefit during this extended period. The daily rate of extended sickness benefit shall be equal to eighty percent of the standard benefit rate.

## 19. What is 'Enhanced Sickness Benefit'?

To  promote  small  family  norms,  this  cash  benefit  is  paid  to  the  insured  person  for  undergoing vasectomy / tubectomy operation. This is paid for a period of 7 days for vasectomy operation and for 14  days  for  tubectomy  operation.  This  period  can  be  extended  in  case  of  any  post  operative complications. The daily rate of enhanced sickness benefit shall be equal to the standard benefit rate.

## 20. What is Disablement?

Disablement is  a  condition  resulting  from  employment  injury,  which  may  render  the  insured  person temporarily incapable of doing his work and necessitating medical treatment

(temporary disablement). It may reduce his earning capacity (permanent partial disability)

or  it  may  totally  deprive  the  insured  person  from  the  capacity  of  doing  any  work  (permanent  total disability).

## 21. What is 'Employment Injury'?

It is a personal injury to an employee caused by an accident or occupational disease arising out of and in the course of his insurable employment within or outside territorial limits of India.

## 22. What is Occupational Disease?

Contracting any disease, while in employment for a specified period in any of the industries listed in Part A, B, or C of Schedule III to the Act is called Occupational disease. Occupational health hazards can  be  of  two  main  types.  Short  term  and  high  dose  with  acute  on  set , synonymous  with  acute poisoning, included by large dose of a toxic substance in an industrial environment, and the other one is chronic on set, which is the result of repeated or continuous exposure of small doses of substances.

## 23. What is 'Temporary Disablement Benefit'?

It is a periodical payment to an insured person suffering from Disablement as a result of 'Employment injury' for the period of abstention from work duly certified by an  Authorized Medical Officer. This is paid  @  90%  of  standard  benefit  rate  till  the  temporary  disability  lasts  and  the  employee  is  able  to resume his normal duties.

## 24. What is Permanent Disablement Benefit?

If there is any residual disability of permanent nature due to employment injury, the insured person is examined by a Medical Board to assess the loss of his earning capacity, if any, and its percentage. The insured person is paid monthly periodical payments of permanent disablement for life from the date following the date of termination of temporary disablement at that percentage out of full daily rate of disablement benefit. Periodical increase in the benefit is also granted due to erosion in the cost of living. The benefit can be paid through ECS in the bank Account of IP or by Money Order at the cost of the Corporation. The insured person can also opt for the payment in lump sum if his daily rate of PDB does  not  exceed  rupees  ten  or  even  if  it  exceeds  ten  per  day, and the  commuted  value  does  not exceed Rupees 60000.

## 25. What is Dependants' Benefit?

Dependants' Benefit  is  a  monthly  pension  payable  to  the  eligible  dependants  of  an  insured  person who dies as a result of an employment injury or occupational disease. The  first benefit payment is made from the Branch Office. Subsequent periodical payments are made through direct bank transfer (DBT) to the beneficiaries.

## 2 6. What is Maternity Benefit?

Maternity benefit is periodical payment(s) to an insured woman for specified period of abstention from work, due to confinement, miscarriage or sickness arising out of pregnancy, pre-mature birth of child or miscarriage or confinement. The rate of maternity benefit shall be equal to the standard benefit rate.

W.e.f. 20.1.2017 Maternity Benefit has also been extended to a 'commissioning mother' (who as biological mother wises to have a child and prefers to get embryo implanted in any other woman) and a insured woman who  legally adopts a child of upto three months of age.

## 27 What is confinement? How long is the maternity benefit admissible in case of confinement?

Confinement means labour resulting in the issue of a living child or labour after 26 weeks of pregnancy resulting in the issue of a child whether alive or dead.

Maternity benefit is payable for 26 weeks to the IW up to two surviving children and 12 weeks for  subsequent  surviving  child,  subject  to  payment  of  contribution  for  not  less  than  70  days  in  the immediately preceding one or two contribution period. The benefit can be claimed at any time prior to

eight  weeks  before  the  expected  date  of  confinement  or  from  the  date  of  confinement  as  per  the condition and requirement of the insured woman.

These Rules are applicable to cases where the Insured Woman delivers a child on or  after  20.1.2017  or  her  expected  date  of  confinement  falls  on  or  after  20 th   January, 2017.

In case of Commissioning mother or adoptive mother, the Insured woman will be paid  maternity  benefit  for  12  weeks  from  the  date  the  child  is  handed  over  to  the commissioning mother or adopting mother as  the case may be.

## 28. What is 'miscarriage' and how long is the benefit admissible?

'Miscarriage' means the expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any time prior to or during the  26th  week  of  pregnancy,  but  does  not  include  a  miscarriage,  the  cause  of  which  is  punishable under the Indian penal code. Maternity benefit is payable for miscarriage for a period of 6 weeks (42 days) from the date following the date of miscarriage subject to fulfillment of the contributory condition prescribed.

## 29. What is sickness arising out of pregnancy etc? How long the Maternity benefit is admissible for it?

If  the  insured  woman  needs  medical  treatment  and  attendance  and  abstention  from  work  due  to sickness arising out of pregnancy, miscarriage, premature child birth or confinement, duly certified by an authorized Medical Officer, Maternity Benefit at is payable for a period one month.

## 30. What is Confinement Expenses?

Confinement  Expenses  is  lump  sum  payment  made  to  an  insured  woman  or  an  insured  person  in respect  of  his  wife  if  the  confinement  occurs  at  a  place  where  necessary  facilities  under  the  ESI Scheme are not available. At present the confinement expenses paid is Rs. 5000/- w.e.f. 1.10.2013 per confinement. It is admissible for two confinements only.

## 31. What are funeral expenses? Who is to be paid?

A  lump  sum  payment  not  exceeding  Rs.  10000/-is  paid  towards  expenditure  on  the  funeral  of  a deceased insured person to the eldest surviving member of the family. If  the Insured Person did not have family or was not residing with his family at the time of death, funeral expenses are paid to the person who actually performs the funeral.

## 32. What is Standard Benefit Rate?

Standard Benefit Rate means average daily wages obtained by dividing the total wages paid during the contribution period by the number of day for which these wages were paid.

## List of Benefits provided by ESIC with its terms and conditions;-

| Sl.No.   | Name of the benefit (s)                               | Contributory conditions                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Duration of Benefit                                                                                                                  | Rate/type of benefit/Remarks                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|----------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1        | Medical Benefit                                       | One should be an insured person under ESI Act. Insured persons/families eligible from the date of entry into insurable employment.                                                                                                    | From day one of entering into insurable employment to till date in insurable employment and during the corresponding benefit period. | Reasonable medical care, comprehensive medical care & clinical investigation for IP and his family members.                                                                                                                    |
| 1(a)     | Medical care to retired Insured persons under Rule 60 | To an IP who ceases to be in an insurable employment on account of permanent disablement caused due to an employment injury on payment of Rs. 120/- for self& spouse.                                                                 | On yearly basis                                                                                                                      | Medical facility for primary and secondary care (excluding SST) within ESI Medical institutions to IP and his spouse till the date                                                                                             |
| 1(b)     | Medical care to retired Insured persons under Rule 61 | To an IP who leaves the insurable employment (on attaining the age of superannuation, or retires under a VRS or takes premature retirement after being insured for not less than five years on payment of Rs. 120/- for self& spouse. | On yearly basis                                                                                                                      | Medical facility for primary and secondary care (excluding SST) within ESI Medical institutions to IP & his spouse for whole life. This benefit is also provided to the widow of deceased IP who had enrolled for this benefit |

| 2    | Sickness Benefit              | On payment of contribution for not less than 78 days in relevant contribution period                                                                                                                        | Upto 91 days in any two consecutive Benefit Period in the event of sickness                                                                                                     | 70% of the average daily wages                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2(b) | Enhanced Sickness Benefit     | As of Sickness Benefit                                                                                                                                                                                      | 7 days to an IP for vasectomy & 14 days for IW for Tubectomy                                                                                                                    | 100% of the average daily wages                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| 3    | Extended Sickness Benefit     | 156 days in 4 contribution periods with eligibility of sickness benefit in one of them.                                                                                                                     | 124 to 309 days which may be extended upto two years (730 days) on medical advise specified for long term diseases till the age of 60 years.                                    | 80% of average daily wages.                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 4    | Disablement Benefit           |                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| 4 a) | Temporary Disablement Benefit | No condition From day one of entering into insurable employment in case of employment injury sustained during the course & out of insurable employment.                                                     | 1. Not payable if disability lasts for less than 3 days (excluding the day of accident). 2. Otherwise payable for the entire period, so long as the temporary disability lasts. | 90% of average daily wages payable during the contribution period/month/day of accident, as the case may be                                                                                                                               |
| 4 b) | Permanent Disablement Benefit | 1. No contributory condition are there. 2. Paid for permanent disablement, whether total or partial, caused by accident or an occupational disease arising out of and in the course of insurable employment | Periodical payments equal to the percentage of the loss of earning capacity caused by the employment injury, as assessed by a duly constituted ESI Medial Board.                | 1. Percentage of the total rate of disablement benefit which is equal to the full rate of TDB. 2. This can be commuted into lumpsum in case the daily rate benefit is upto Rs.10 or the total commuted value does not exceed Rs. 60,000/- |

| 5(a)   | Dependant Benefit                                         | No condition. From day one of entering into insurable employment and during the insurable employment   | Paid to the dependents of the Insured person who dies as a result of employment injury as defined in Rule 58. For life to the widow or until her re-marriage and to each legitimate or adopted son upto the age of 25 years. To each legitimate or adopted unmarried daughter until she attains the age of 25 years or until marriage, whichever is earlier. For infirm child till infirmity lasts.   | 90% of average daily wages among dependents in fixed proportion.                                                                                                                                 |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5(b)   | Medical care to the Widow in receipt of Dependant Benefit | For widow in receipt of dependant benefit                                                              | Yearly basis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Medical facility for primary and secondary care (excluding SST) within ESI Medical institutions on yearly payment of Rs. 120/ to the widow of deceased IP who is in receipt of dependent benefit |
| 6      | Maternity Benefit                                         | 70 days contributions payable in the immediately preceding 1 or 2 consecutive contribution periods.    | 26 weeks upto two surviving children and thereafter 12 weeks for 3 rd surviving child onwards. 6 weeks in case of miscarriage 12 weeks for the commissioning mother 12 weeks for the adopting mother                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 100% of the average daily wages.                                                                                                                                                                 |

|   7 | Confinement Expenses                                                  | The insured woman and insured person in respect of his wife shall be paid medical bonus paid on account of confinement expenses at a place where necessary medical facility under the scheme is not available                                                                   | Upto two confinements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Rs.5,000/-per case upto two confinements.                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|   8 | Funeral Expenses                                                      | 1. IP should have been eligible for any of the benefit under ESI Scheme. 2. On production of a death certificate by the eldest surviving member/ dependents/any person who actually incurs the expenditure on funeral                                                           | One time payment defraying expenses on funeral of an Insured person.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Maximum Rs.10,000/- only.                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|   9 | Unemployment Allowanc under Rajiv Gandhi Sharmik Kalyan Yojna'(RGSKY) | Insurable employment for the last 2 years with 78 days contribution paid/payable in each contribution period, involuntary unemployment rendered due to closure of Factory,/Establishment retrenchment or permanent disablement due to non- employment injury not less than 40%. | Unemployment Allowance for a maximum period of 24 months during the entire insurable employment. Vocational training for duration upto 1 year for upgrading skills of Insured person receiving unemployment allowance. Entire fee charged by Government approved/accredited institutions reimbursed by ESIC | 1.Unemployment allowance at the rates of (a) 50% of last avg. daily wages for 0- 12 months (b) 25% of last avg. daily wages for 13-24 months 2. Medical care for self and family during receipt of unemployment allowance |

| 10   | Vocational Rehabilitation Allowance under Rule 60   | Not more than 45 years of age and disability not less than 40% due to Employment Injury   | Training in any field in a Govt. Institution or Govt. accredited Institution as per the norms of the Vocational Rehabilitation Centre/institution.   | 1.Conveyance charges at normal rate/second class railway/bus fare as applicable. 2.Expenditure charged by the center or Rs.123/- per day,   |
|------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

***