## EATING WELL DURING PREGNANCY

Why is eating right during pregnancy a big deal? Your baby depends on you to give him everything he needs to grow. Eating plenty of healthy foods during pregnancy and while breastfeeding will help shape your baby's preferences for healthy and nutritious foods.

## FILLING YOUR PLATE

- Instead of eating three big meals, try to eat five to six small meals a day.
- Fill your plate with different colored fruits and veggies to make your plate more inviting and your meals healthier.
- Make half of your grains whole grains such as oatmeal, brown rice, whole wheat bread, and whole wheat tortillas.
- Eat lean protein like chicken, fish, eggs, peanut butter, beans, or low-fat cheese with each meal and snack.
- Eat foods high in healthy fats. Avocados, nuts, and olive oil are all good sources of healthy fats. Eat more fatty fish. Fatty fish contain important omega 3 fatty acids for your baby's brain. Guidelines for safely eating fish during pregnancy and while breastfeeding can be found at:

https://www.health.state.mn.us/ communities/environment/fish/docs/ choosefishenglish.pdf

- Drink plenty of water.
- Limit caffeine (less than 200mg/day).

## SNACKS: TASTY, HEALTHY AND EASY

- Peanut butter with celery
- Whole grain crackers or fruit with peanut butter
- Cucumber and carrots with hummus dip
- Yogurt with dry cereal, nuts, or dried fruit
- Fruit smoothie

<!-- image -->

## TAKE A PRENATAL VITAMIN

Take a prenatal vitamin as prescribed by your health care provider. Most health care providers recommend a prenatal vitamin with 27 mg of iron, 150 mcg of iodine, and 400 mcg of folic acid. Iron is important for baby's growth and development. Gummy prenatal vitamins have no iron. Ask your doctor about other options.

## AVOID UNSAFE FOODS

- Do not eat any raw or undercooked: eggs, meat, poultry, or seafood.
- Heat deli meat, lunch meats, and hot dogs to steaming hot.
- Do not eat soft cheeses such as feta, Brie, and Mexican-style ('queso blanco fresco') cheeses unless they are pasteurized.
- Do not drink unpasteurized milk or juice.
- Avoid raw sprouts.

<!-- image -->