## Guinea Pig Model for Lassa Virus Infection of Reproductive Tract and Considerations for Sexual and Vertical Transmission

Josilene N. Seixas, Joy M. Gary, 1  Stephen R. Welch, Sarah C. Genzer, JoAnn D. Coleman-McCray, Jessica R. Harmon, Christina F. Spiropoulou, Luciana Silva-Flannery, Georgia Ficarra, Elizabeth Lee, Julu Bhatnagar, Jessica R. Spengler, Jana M. Ritter

Lassa virus (LASV) causes Lassa fever; mortality rates are  higher  in  pregnant  women,  and  fetal  infection  and death are possible. Sexual transmission after recovery from Lassa fever has occurred. Using virus strains that are lethal (Josiah) or nonlethal (NJ2015) in guinea pigs, we  characterized  LASV-associated  pathology  and  reproductive  tissue  tropism  in  male  and  female  animals. Uterus, ovary, and epididymis were the earliest and most affected  tissues;  perivascular  lymphocytic  inflamma -tion was prominent at lethal timepoints and persisted in survivors  after  clinical  disease.  LASV-Josiah  RNA  was detected in reproductive tissues by 4 days postinfection (dpi).  Virus  localized  by  immunohistochemistry  and  in situ hybridization predominantly within vascular smooth muscle and interstitial mesenchymal cells and was widespread in reproductive tissues in lethal infections (12-25 dpi) but not detected in survivors (41-42 dpi). Using a physiologically relevant model, we describe reproductive tissue targets to further elucidate LASV infection and effects on reproductive health and virus transmission.

L assa virus (LASV) is a zoonotic arenavirus that causes Lassa fever (LF), a hemorrhagic disease endemic to West Africa, where seasonal outbreaks result in an estimated 1-3 million illnesses and up to  5,000  deaths  annually  ( 1 ).  After  an  incubation period of 6-21 days, the disease manifests as fever, weakness, and malaise, followed by musculoskeletal,  respiratory,  gastrointestinal,  or  other  signs. Long-term  ocular  ( 2 , 3 )  and  auditory  ( 4 -6 )  complications can occur. In severe cases, hemorrhagic

Author affiliation: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3201/eid3112.250396

fever with shock causes death within 14 days ( 7 ). Mortality rates in pregnant women are disproportionately high, especially in the third trimester, in which reported mortality rates were &gt;2 times those observed  in  nonpregnant  women  ( 8 ).  Fetal  loss rates  are  75%-100%  ( 9 , 10 ),  and  vertical  transmission has been reported ( 9 -12 ).

Most LF is caused by rodent-to-human transmission through direct contact with infected animals or their excreta ( 13 -17 ). Horizontal human transmission, mostly nosocomial, has also been reported through contact with infected blood, urine, or other body flu -ids ( 18 ). Sexual transmission of LASV has been postulated ( 19 ), and persistence of LASV in seminal fluid for &gt;3 months has been documented; however, studies describing the dynamics and infectivity of LASV in  semen  or  other  reproductive  tract  secretions  are sparse ( 12 , 20 ).

Autopsies  are  rarely  performed  on  LF  patients, and reproductive tissues are not routinely collected; thus,  descriptions  of  fatal  LF  pathology  and  tissue virus  distribution  are  limited  overall,  and  particularly for reproductive tissues ( 21 ). In 1 human study, pathology  associated  with  LASV  infection  was  described for 6 complete autopsies, 15 cases with postmortem  biopsies  of  tissues  other  than  liver,  and  7 fetuses from infected women ( 22 ). The authors mentioned that careful examination of ovary, uterus, placenta, and breast demonstrated no specific pathologic alterations ( 22 ). Another study of postmortem tissue samples from 12 confirmed LF cases reported LASV antigens and viral particles in multiple reproductive

1 Current affiliation: StageBio, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

organ and cell types, including breast ductal epithelial cells, ovarian thecal and stromal cells, and placental trophoblasts ( 21 ).  To address gaps in knowledge of reproductive tract effects of LASV infection and to learn  more  about  potential  for  sexual  transmission, we investigated LASV pathology and tissue tropism in the female and male reproductive tracts of experimentally  infected  strain  13/N  guinea  pigs,  a  wellcharacterized model of LASV disease ( 2 , 3 , 23 , 24 ) and an applicable model of human pregnancy and fetal growth ( 23 ).

## Materials And Methods

## Biosafety and Ethics

Work with infectious virus or infected animals was conducted  in  a  Biosafety  Level  4  laboratory  at  the Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC; Atlanta,  GA,  USA).  Recombinant  virus  work  was approved  by  the  CDC  Institutional  Biosafety  Committee.  Animal  experiments  were  approved  by  the CDC  Institutional  Animal  Care  and  Use  Committee  (approval  nos.  2833,  3073)  and  performed  in  an AAALAC-accredited facility.

## Virus and Virus Detection

Recombinant LASV-Josiah is based on the sequence of an isolate obtained in 1976 from the serum of a 40-year-old man hospitalized at Songo Hospital in Sebgwena, Sierra Leone ( 24 , 25 ). We rescued LASVJosiah  in  BSR-T7/5  cells  and  passaged  2  times  in Vero-E6 cells (GenBank accession nos. HQ688673.l, HQ688675.1). Recombinant LASV 812673-LBRUSA-2015 (LASV-NJ2015) is based on the sequence of  an  isolate  obtained  in  2015  from  a  55-year-old man  who  died  of  LF  in  New  Jersey  after  returning  from  Liberia.  We  rescued  LASV-NJ2015  in BSR-T7/5  cells  and  passaged  2  times  in  Vero-E6 cells  ( 26 )  (GenBank accession nos. MG812650 and MG812651). We sequence-verified viral stocks and confirmed them to be mycoplasma-free. We deter -mined titers (as focus-forming units [FFU] or 50% tissue  culture  infectious  dose  per  milliliter)  on Vero-E6 cells by immunofluorescence assays using an  in-house  anti-LASV  monoclonal  antibody  mix (SPR628) targeting nucleoprotein (NP) and glycoprotein (GP) 2 and calculated them using the method of Reed and Muench ( 27 ).  Further information on virus detection in tissues by quantitative reverse transcription  PCR  (qRT-PCR),  immunohistochemistry (IHC), and in situ hybridization (ISH) are provided  (Appendix,  https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/EID/ article/31/12/25-0396-App1.pdf).

## Guinea Pigs

We examined tissues from 57 strain 13/N guinea pigs (26  male  and  31  female,  age  range  165-1,433  days at  challenge)  previously  reported  in  pathogenesis ( 26 , 28 -30 )  or  vaccine ( 31 )  studies. We inoculated all animals  subcutaneously  between  the  scapulae  with 10 4 FFU  (equivalent  to ≈ 2 × 10 4 50%  tissue  culture infectious  dose/mL)  of  recombinant  LASV-Josiah (n  =  51  [23  male,  28  female])  or  LASV-NJ2015  (n  = 6  [3  male,  3  female]).  Fifteen  of  51  LASV-Josiah-inoculated  animals  were  included  in  a  viral  replicon particle  (VRP)  vaccine  study  ( 31 ),  in  which  animals were vaccinated subcutaneously with 10 7  FFU of VRP under these  conditions:  VRP  followed  by  challenge 28  days  later  (n  =  5);  replication  incompetent  VRP (treated with 5 × 10 6  rads of gamma-irradiation) followed by challenge 28 days later (n = 5); and VRP 1 day after challenge (n = 5) (Figure 1). All remaining animals (n = 42) inoculated with either LASV-NJ2015 (n = 6) or LASV-Josiah (n = 36) were unvaccinated. Animals were housed individually in a climate-controlled  laboratory  (68-79°F,  30%-70%  humidity)  on a 12-hour light/dark cycle in individually ventilated cages  (Thoren  Caging  Systems  Inc.,  https://thoren. com) with deep, soft bedding (soft pellets, Carefresh [Healthy  Pet,  https://www.healthy-pet.com],  and Enviro-Dri [Shepherd Specialty Papers, https:// www.ssponline.com]). Animals received daily fresh vegetable  enrichment  and  Timothy  hay,  and  Certified  Guinea  Pig  Diet  5026  (LabDiet,  https://www. labdiet.com)  and  water  were  provided  ad  libitum. For  individual  identification  and  body  temperature monitoring,  we  implanted  BMDS  IPTT-300  microchip  transponders  (Avidity  Science,  https://www. avidityscience.com) subcutaneously in the interscapular  region.  We  monitored  animals  daily,  as  previously reported ( 26 , 30 , 31 )  and  humanely euthanized them with isoflurane vapors followed by intracardiac sodium pentobarbital injection upon meeting euthanasia criteria or at study completion.

## Results

## Widespread Reproductive Tract Infection during Lethal LASV Disease in Guinea Pigs

To investigate reproductive tract infection histologically in lethal disease, we collected tissues from strain 13 guinea pigs at terminal endpoint after subcutaneous  LASV-Josiah  inoculation,  which  caused  severe disease warranting euthanasia 14-28 days postinfection (dpi) (median 23 days) in 11 animals (6 female, 5 male). Inflammatory changes were identified in &gt;1 reproductive tissue from all (6/6) female and 3/5 male

Figure 1. Study design to evaluate reproductive tissue pathology and tissue tropism in strain 13/N guinea pig model of Lassa virus infection. Tissues collected from a total of 57 adult strain 13/N guinea pigs inoculated subcutaneously with a target dose of 10 4  FFU of LASV (equivalent to ≈2 × 10 4 50% tissue culture infectious dose), representing 3 independent studies, were examined by PCR, hematoxylin and eosin, immunohistochemistry, or in situ hybridization. Animals were separated into 3 study groups on the basis of time of sampling and clinical outcome: those serially euthanized at predetermined study endpoints (2, 4, 8, 12, or 16 dpi [n = 5 at each timepoint]) to investigate early infection with highly pathogenic LASV-Josiah strain; terminal animals that reached endpoint criteria because of disease after LASV-Josiah infection (unvaccinated [n = 9] or vaccinated with 𝛾 -irradiated viral replicon particle [VRP] [n = 2]); and survivors euthanized at 41-42 dpi. Survivors were 15 animals infected with LASV-Josiah (vaccinated preexposure with VRP [n = 5] or gamma-irradiated VRP [n = 3], vaccinated postexposure with VRP [n = 5], or unvaccinated [n = 2] and 6 animals infected with strain NJ2015 [all unvaccinated (n = 6)]). Shaded symbols indicate animals that exhibited overt signs (defined as weight loss &gt;10%, temperature &gt; 39.5°C for &gt; 2 consecutive days, or presence of clinical signs [i.e., clinical score &gt;1 on &gt;1 days). dpi, days postinfection; FFU, focus-forming units; LASV, Lassa virus; V, vaccinated.

<!-- image -->

animals,  including  ovary,  oviduct,  uterus,  cervix/ vagina, epididymis, seminal vesicle, and penis/prepuce; inflammation was not seen in testes (Table; Fig -ures 2, 3; Appendix Table 1). Those tissues had mild to moderate, multifocal inflammation, which formed perivascular cuffs with occasional vascular mural infiltration. We noted more inflammation at 20-26 dpi than at 14-17 dpi; less inflammation was present at the  latest  lethal  timepoint  (28  dpi;  1  female).  Infil -trates were predominately lymphocytic and presence of plasma cells and histiocytes was variable; heterophils were rare (Table).

Among 6 female animals with lethal disease, we detected viral antigen, RNA, or both in ovary, oviduct, and uterus of all 5 animals that were euthanized on days 1425 and in the cervix/vagina in 3/5 animals tested (Figure 2, panel A; Appendix Table 1). Staining was most frequent in the vascular smooth muscle and perivascular mesenchymal cells including fibroblasts, as well as in  the  uterine  muscle  and  endometrial  stroma  (Table, Figure 4). We saw similar distribution and intensity of staining in all positive animals; 1 female animal euthanized at 28 dpi had only very mild inflammation and no antigen was detected in reproductive tissues, although in situ hybridization (ISH) was positive in uterus.

Among  male  animals  with  lethal  disease,  viral antigen was detected in the epididymis of 4/5 animals  euthanized  at  17-26  dpi  (Figure  2,  panel B; Appendix Table 1). Epididymal staining was focally extensive and within interstitial stromal and inflammatory cells, as well as tubular epithelium, endothelium, vascular smooth muscle cells, and intratubular cells including spermatozoa (Table; Figure 5).  We  detected  no  antigen  in  any  testis  from lethally  infected  male  animals,  and  only  2/5  had rare granular ISH staining in very few seminiferous epithelial or interstitial cells.  In  addition,  staining by  immunohistochemistry  (IHC)  or  ISH  occurred very  rarely  in  3  accessory  sex  glands  (2  seminal vesicles,  1  prostate)  of  lethally  infected  male  animals at 17-23 dpi.

We quantified viral RNA (vRNA) using qRT-PCR on ovary and testis samples from a subset (3 female, 3 male) of lethally infected animals. Testing revealed vRNA in all: up to 2.2 × 10 7  copies/µL in ovaries and up to 4.3 × 10 3  copies/µL in testes.

We  evaluated  mammary  tissues  in  3/6  female and 1/5 male animals with lethal disease. Two female and 1 male animals had mild glandular interstitial or dermal  lymphocytic  infiltrates  and  edema  (Table;

Table. Pathologic findings and virus localization by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization in reproductive and mammary tissues of LASV-Josiah or LASV-NJ2015 strain-infected guinea pigs at different timepoints in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission*

|      |                |                 | Hematoxylin and eosin   | Hematoxylin and eosin                                                              | Immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization   | Immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization                                                |
|------|----------------|-----------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sex  | Tissue         | Group†          | n/N (%)‡                | Lesion/change                                                                      | n/N (%)‡                                        | Cellular location                                                                            |
| F    | Ovary          | Early           | 1/15 (7)                | PILPI, PE                                                                          | 7/15 (47)                                       | TIC, GC TIC, GC, IMC, VSMC,                                                                  |
|      |                | Lethal          | 5/6 (83)                | PILPI, PE                                                                          | 5/6 (83)                                        | ENDC                                                                                         |
|      |                | Survivor        | 2/10 (20)               | PILPI                                                                              | 0/10 (0)                                        | ND                                                                                           |
|      | Oviduct        | Early           | 1/15 (7)                | PILPI                                                                              | 3/15 (20)                                       | IMC                                                                                          |
|      |                | Lethal          | 5/6 (83)                | PILPI, PE, congestion                                                              | 5/6 (83)                                        | PV/IMC, VSMC, OSMC, intravascular inflammatory cells                                         |
|      |                | Survivor        | 3/10 (30)               | PILPI                                                                              | 0/10 (0)                                        | ND                                                                                           |
|      | Uterus         | Early           | 6/15 (40)               | PILPI, PIE, congestion                                                             | 10/15 (67)                                      | Endometrial stromal, epithelial cells,                                                       |
|      |                | Lethal          | 6/6 (100)               | PILPI, PIE, congestion, vasculitis                                                 | 6/6 (100)                                       | IFMC, ENDC PV/IMC, IFMC, ENDC, VSMC, OSMC, endometrial stromal                               |
|      |                | Survivor        | 4/10 (40)               | PILPI, PIE, congestion                                                             | 0/10 (0)                                        | ND                                                                                           |
|      | Cervix/ vagina | Early           | 2/12 (17)               | PILPI, PIE                                                                         | 8/12 (67)                                       | IMC, VSMC, epithelial cells, intraluminal debris, FMC                                        |
|      |                | Lethal          | 3/6 (50)                | PILPI, PIE PILPI, PIE                                                              | 3/6 (50) 0/10 (0)                               | IMC, VSMC, epithelial cells, ENDC, intraluminal debris, IFMC                                 |
| M    | Testis         | Survivor Early  | 4/10 (4) 0/10 (0)       | None                                                                               | 2/10 (20)                                       | ND IMC, ENDC, intravascular                                                                  |
|      |                | Lethal          | 0/5 (0)                 | None                                                                               | 2/5 (40)                                        | IMC, seminiferous tubule                                                                     |
|      |                | Survivor        | 0/11 (0)                | None                                                                               | 0/11 (0)                                        | ND                                                                                           |
|      | Epididymis     | Early           | 1/10 (10)               | PILPI, epithelial necrosis, intratubular debris                                    | 3/10 (30)                                       | IMC, peritubular, tubular epithelium, intraluminal cells (including spermatozoa)             |
|      |                | Lethal          | 3/5 (60)                | PILPI, epithelial necrosis, intratubular heterophils                               | 4/5 (80)                                        | IMC, VSMC, ENDC, tubular epithelium, intraluminal cells/debris                               |
|      |                |                 | (27)                    | PILPI, PIE, intratubular                                                           | 0/11 (0)                                        | (including spermatozoa) ND                                                                   |
|      |                | Survivor        | 3/11                    | heterophils, MXI, loss of tubules                                                  |                                                 |                                                                                              |
|      | Seminal        | Early           | 0/10 (0) 1/5 (20)       | None PILPI, PE                                                                     | 3/10 (30) 3/5 (60)                              | PV/IMC                                                                                       |
|      | vesicle/       | Lethal          | 0/11 (0)                | None                                                                               | 0/11 (0)                                        | IMC, intraluminal debris, VSMC ND                                                            |
|      | prostate       | Survivor        |                         |                                                                                    |                                                 | NS                                                                                           |
|      | Penis/         | Early           | NS 1/3 (33)             | NS                                                                                 | NS 0/3 (0)                                      | ND                                                                                           |
|      | prepuce        | Lethal Survivor | 2/7 (29)                | MXI (preputial gland duct) PLPI                                                    | 0/7 (0)                                         | ND                                                                                           |
| Both | Mammary tissue | Early           | 8/20 (40)               | PILPI (glands and skin), histiocytic infiltrates, PIE (glands), epidermal necrosis | 11/20 (55)                                      | IMC, dermis, follicular wall, epidermis, IFMC                                                |
|      |                | Lethal          | 3/4 (75)                | PILPI, PIE (glands and skin)                                                       | 2/4 (50)                                        | IMC, ENDC, glandular epithelial cells, IFMC, intraluminal debris, epidermis, follicular wall |
|      |                | Survivor        | 4/13 (31)               | PILPI (glands and skin), PIE, congestion, MXI (glands)                             | 0/13 (0)                                        | ND                                                                                           |

*dpi, days postinfection; ENDC, endothelial cells; GC, granulosa cells; IFMC, inflammatory cells; IMC, interstitial mesenchymal cells; LASV, Lassa virus; MXI, mixed inflammatory infiltrate; ND, not detected; NS, not sampled; PE, perivascular edema; PIE, perivascular and interstitial edema; PILPI, perivascular and interstitial lymphoplasmacytic inflammation; PLPI, perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammation; PV, perivascular; OSMC, other (nonvascular) smooth muscle cells; TIC, Theca-interstitial cells; VSMC, vascular smooth muscle cells.

†Early refers to animals serially euthanized 2-16 dpi after infection with LASV-Josiah-strain. Lethal refers to animals lethally infected with LASV-Josiahstrain and euthanized because of severity of clinical disease 14-28 dpi. Survivor refers to animals that survived LASV-Josiah-strain or LASV-NJ2015 strain infection and were euthanized 41-42 dpi.

‡n indicates number of animals with pathologic changes or staining in the tissue; N represents total number of animals evaluated in the group; percentage indicates percentage of animals evaluated that had the histopathologic finding present or with positive staining by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization in that tissue; not all tissues were evaluated or tested by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization for all animals (Appendix Tables 1-3, https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/EID/article/31/12/25-0396-App1.pdf).

Figure 6). We detected antigen or RNA in mammary tissue from the 2 female animals, localized to rare endothelial cells and perivascular cells including stromal  and  inflammatory  cells,  glandular  epithelium and intraluminal cells, and epidermal and follicular epithelium (Table; Figure 6).

## Detection of LASV-Josiah in Reproductive Tissues before Onset of Clinical Signs

After  LASV-Josiah  challenge,  we  collected  tissues for histologic and virologic (qRT-PCR) investigation in animals serially euthanized at 2, 4, 8, 12, or 16 dpi to  characterize  early  reproductive  tract  infection.  In

female animals, we detected vRNA by qRT-PCR in mammary tissue as early as 4 dpi and in ovary (and in urogenital swab specimens, as previously report- ed [ 30 ]) from 8-16 dpi. In male animals, we detected vRNA by qRT-PCR in testis, epididymis, mammary tissue,  and  genital  swabs  from  8-16  dpi.  At  8  dpi,

Figure 2. Localization and severity of histopathologic changes and Lassa virus (LASV) detection in reproductive tissues of strain 13/N guinea pigs experimentally infected with LASV strain Josiah or NJ2015 in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. Female (A) and male (B) guinea pig reproductive tract anatomy, histopathology, and virus detection (antigen by IHC or viral RNA by ISH) after subcutaneous infection with LASV strain Josiah or NJ2015 (target dose, 10 4  focus-forming units). Anatomic localization, severity, and incidence are depicted and delineated by stage of infection: early ( &lt; 16 dpi), lethal (meeting endpoint criteria at 14-28 dpi), and survivor (41 or 42 dpi). Histopathologic changes (H&amp;E) and viral detection (IHC or ISH) were scored semiquantitatively for each tissue as absent (0), minimal (1), mild (2), moderate (3), or severe (4). Not all analyses were performed for all animals (Appendix Tables 1-3, https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/EID/article/31/12/25-0396-App1. pdf). H&amp;E, IHC, and ISH scores represent mean severity values for each tissue across all animals tested. An asterisk (*) indicates that only 1 animal was evaluated in the group; gray boxes indicate tissues that were not available or not evaluated. Relative incidence of histopathologic change or virus detection in early, lethal, and survivor cohorts with sufficient group sizes (n &gt;3) is shown in radar plots; only a single male animal in the lethal cohort was excluded, as it was the sole animal evaluated and test results were positive in both mammary gland and skin. H&amp;E, hematoxylin and eosin; IHC, immunohistochemistry; ISH, in situ hybridization.

<!-- image -->

## RESEARCH

Figure 3. Histopathologic findings in reproductive tissues of strain 13/N guinea pigs with lethal disease after Lassa virus (LASV) strain Josiah infection in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. Panels A-F depict samples from female guinea pigs; panels G-L depict samples from male guinea pigs. A) Ovary (25 days postinfection [dpi]) with moderate perivascular and interstitial inflammation (arrows). B) Oviduct (20 dpi) with focal interstitial inflammation and edema (asterisk) within the serosa. C) Uterus (23 dpi) with mild endometrial inflammation and edema (asterisk) and hemosiderin-laden macrophages (arrow). D) Uterus (25 dpi) with multifocal mononuclear inflammatory cells (arrow) forming partial cuffs around vessels in the myometrium. E) Uterine vessel (23 dpi) with mural infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells (arrow). F) Cervix (23 dpi) with multifocal, mild, perivascular inflammation (arrow). G) Epididymis (26 dpi) with moderate perivascular inflammation (asterisks). H) Epididymis (23 dpi) with multifocal interstitial inflammation around tubules (asterisk) and a vessel (arrow). I) Epididymis (26 dpi) with marked

epididymitis with tubular dilation by inflammatory cells (arrow) and rupture, associated with sperm granuloma formation (asterisk). J) Epididymis (23 dpi) with marked epididymitis, with interstitial inflammation (arrows), and intratubular heterophils associated with rupture and granuloma formation (asterisk). K) Epididymis (26 dpi) with marked interstitial inflammation (arrow) and tubular epithelial necrosis with heterophils (asterisk). L) Prostate (23 dpi) with mild focal lymphocytic, perivascular inflammation (arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin stain. Original magnifications × 20 (panels A, E, G, I, K), × 15 (panels B, H), and × 10 (panels C, D, F, J, L).

<!-- image -->

vRNA was detected by qRT-PCR in the gonads and associated reproductive tissues of all serially euthanized animals (ovaries, ≤7.3 × 105 copies/μL; uteri, ≤5.5  ×  104  copies/μL;  testes,  ≤1.0  ×  105  copies/μL; and epididymides, ≤3.4 × 104 copies/μL).

Histopathologic changes were absent in reproductive  tissues  of  serially  euthanized  animals  at earlier timepoints (female at 2-8 dpi, male at 2-12 dpi); we detected only subtle changes, similar but overall  milder  than  seen  in  lethal  disease,  in  6/6 uteri and rarely in other tissues (1 ovary, 1 oviduct, 2  cervix/vagina)  of  female  animals  euthanized  at later timepoints (12-16 dpi). One of 2 male animals had  lymphoplasmacytic  inflammation  with  rare epithelial  necrosis  and  intratubular  debris  in  the epididymis at 16 dpi (Table; Figures 2, 7; Appendix Table 2). We saw no other notable histopathologic lesions  in  the  male  reproductive  tracts  in  serially euthanized animals.

In serially euthanized female animals, 10/15 had staining by IHC or ISH in &gt;1 reproductive tissue (Table; Figures 2, 8; Appendix Table 2). We observed staining in 7/9 ovaries at 8-16 dpi, the most widespread at 12 dpi. At 8 dpi, focal staining was in a corpus luteum, mainly in granulosa lutein cells, but also in capillary endothelial  and  few  thecal  cells.  At  later  time  points (at and after 12 dpi), staining was in theca-interstitial cells and granulosa cells. We noted scattered staining in interstitial cells in 3/6 oviducts at 12 and 16 dpi. During 4-16 dpi, 10/12 uteri demonstrated staining. At 4

and 8 dpi, staining was multifocal and rare within endometrial stromal cells. At 12 and 16 dpi, staining in the  uterus  was  similarly  distributed  in  endometrial stromal and epithelial cells but increased overall at 12 dpi and decreased again at 16 dpi. At those later timepoints,  staining  within  inflammatory  or  endothelial cells in areas with perivascular inflammation was rare. Of available cervix/vagina tissues, 8/11 from 4-16 dpi showed multifocal staining throughout the superficial subepithelial stroma, within endothelial cells and vascular  smooth  muscle  cells,  in  the  myometrium,  and, less frequently (2 animals at 12 and 16 dpi), in the cervical epithelium, but not in the vaginal epithelium (Appendix Table 2).

In  serially  euthanized  male  animals,  2/10  testes (at  12  dpi)  and  3/10  accessory  sex  glands  (at  12  and 16 dpi) showed rare viral detection by ISH but not by IHC. Staining was in interstitial and intravascular cells in those tissues and was unaccompanied by pathologic changes. Epididymides showed multifocal LASV staining by ISH in 3/6 animals tested at 8-16 dpi; only 1 of those 6 also showed staining by IHC at 16 dpi. Staining was in epididymal interstitial cells at 8 dpi and in tubular epithelial and intraluminal cells (including spermatozoa) at 16 dpi. We saw no staining in any tested male tissue before 8 dpi (Table; Figures 2, 8; Appendix Table 2).

Mammary tissues from serially euthanized animals of both sexes had no or minimal histopathologic

Figure 4. Detection of Lassa virus (LASV) antigens and RNA in reproductive tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) in strain 13/N female guinea pigs lethally infected with LASV strain Josiah in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. IHC and ISH chromogens are red. A) Uterus (25 dpi), ISH. Staining in interstitial mesenchymal cells (asterisks) and rare endothelial cells (arrow). B) Uterus (23 dpi), ISH. Staining in vascular smooth muscle cells (arrows) and perivascular interstitial mesenchymal cells (asterisk). C) Ovary (23 dpi), ISH. Staining within a corpus luteum (asterisk), in theca-interstitial cells (arrows), and in inflammatory cells within and around a vascular wall (white arrow). D) Oviduct (23 dpi), ISH. Staining in mesenchymal interstitial cells (asterisk) and intravascular inflammatory cells (arrow). E) Uterus (23 dpi), ISH. Extensive staining in the endometrial stroma (asterisk) and myometrial smooth muscle cells (arrows). F) Uterus (23 dpi), ISH. Extensive staining in the endometrial glandular epithelial cells (arrows). G) Endocervix (23 dpi), IHC. Extensive staining in mesenchymal cells. H) Vagina (23 dpi), IHC. Staining in submucosal mesenchymal cells (asterisk) and intraluminal cellular debris (arrow). Original magnifications × 40 (panels A, B, D, G, H), × 30 (panel C), × 20 (panels E, F).

<!-- image -->

## RESEARCH

Figure 5. Detection of Lassa virus (LASV) antigens and RNA in reproductive tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) in strain 13/N male guinea pigs lethally infected with LASV strain Josiah in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. A) Epididymis (18 dpi), ISH. Regionally extensive staining in epididymal epithelial cells. B) Epididymis (26 dpi), ISH. Staining in interstitial mesenchymal cells, endothelium (arrow), tubular epithelium (white arrow), and intratubular inflammatory cells (asterisk). C) Testis (18 dpi), ISH. Focal intracellular staining in the interstitium (arrow). D) Epididymis (23 dpi), ISH. Intraluminal staining

<!-- image -->

including spermatozoa (asterisk). E) Seminal vesicle (17 dpi), ISH. Focal staining in subepithelial stromal cells. Original magnifications × 5 (panel A), × 40 (panels B, D), × 63 (panel C), × 20 (panel E).

changes at all timepoints, including minimal mononuclear  or  mixed  inflammatory  infiltrates  and  mild periglandular edema in 5/17 animals (at 12-16 dpi) for which mammary glandular tissue was evaluated. Mammary  skin  occasionally  showed  mild  dermal lymphohistiocytic  inflammation,  epidermal  kerati - nocyte degeneration, and single cell death. Although vRNA was detected by qRT-PCR in mammary gland as  early  as  4  dpi,  staining  by  IHC  or  ISH  was  seen in mammary gland or skin in 8/12 tested female animals (8-16 dpi) and 3/8 tested male animals (12-16 dpi), characterized by multifocal staining with similar

Figure 6. Histopathologic findings and detection of Lassa virus (LASV) antigens and RNA in mammary tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) in strain 13/N guinea pigs lethally infected with LASV strain Josiah in study of guinea pig model for LASV infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. A) Mammary skin (23 dpi), hematoxylin and eosin stain. Mild interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and edema (asterisk) in the superficial dermis. B) Mammary gland (25 dpi), hematoxylin and eosin stain. Mild interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates (arrows) in the periglandular stroma. C) Mammary skin (23 dpi), IHC. Staining in keratinocytes of the epidermis. D) Mammary gland (23 dpi), ISH. Staining around vessels and within the stroma between glands (arrow) and within cells in a mammary duct lumen (asterisk). Original magnifications × 10 (panels A-C), × 20 (panel D).

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Histopathologic findings in reproductive tissues from strain 13/N guinea pigs serially euthanized 4-16 days postinfection (dpi) after Lassa virus strain Josiah infection in study of guinea pig model for infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. A) Perivascular mononuclear infiltrates (arrow) in oviduct (12 dpi). B) Perivascular (arrow) and interstitial (asterisk) lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates within the myometrium in uterus (16 dpi). C) Interstitial and perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates (arrows), with rare single cell necrosis of the tubular epithelial cells (asterisk) in epididymis (16 dpi). D) Mild perivascular and vascular inflammation (arrow) and interstitial edema (asterisk) in epididymis (16 dpi). Hematoxylin and eosin stain. Original magnifications × 40 (panels A, B, D), × 20 (panel C).

<!-- image -->

distribution as described for the mammary tissues of lethally infected animals (Table; Appendix Table 2).

## Reduced Pathology and No LASV Detection in Surviving Guinea Pigs

To assess reproductive tissue pathology and viral persistence in LASV survivors, we histologically examined tissues from 21 LASV-infected guinea pigs (strain Josiah or NJ2015) euthanized at 41-42 dpi. Animals represented 2 outcomes: survival after overt clinical disease or survival without overt clinical disease (Appendix Table 3). Overt disease was defined as weight loss  &gt;10%,  temperature  &gt;39.5°C  for  &gt;2  consecutive days, or a clinical score of &gt;1 on &gt;1 days. Both untreated and vaccinated surviving animals were included, because animals with and without clinical intervention  are  clinically  relevant  for  these  investigations. Among 12 survivors of overt clinical disease, similar but generally less severe perivascular and interstitial inflammatory changes described for animals in other groups (&lt;28 dpi) were variably present at 41-42 dpi (Table). All animals with inflammation had been in -fected with LASV-Josiah; those included 4/5 female animals with effects in 2 ovaries, 3 oviducts, 4 uteri, and 4 cervix/vagina and 3 mammary glands and 3/7 male animals with inflammation in 1 tissue each, in -cluding 2 epididymides and 1 penis/prepuce. No histopathologic changes were seen in testes or accessory sex glands of surviving male animals (Table; Figures 2, 9; Appendix Table 3). Among 9 surviving animals without  overt  clinical  disease,  1/5  female  animals had  minimal  inflammation  in  mammary  glandular tissue but no inflammation in other reproductive tis -sues. One of 4 male animals had minimal epididymal inflammation  only,  and  another  male  survivor  had minimal inflammation in the penis/prepuce. Neither viral antigen nor RNA were detected by IHC or ISH in any female or male reproductive tissue tested from surviving animals, regardless of clinical course. We evaluated tissues from 14 survivors (all infected with LASV-Josiah)  by  qRT-PCR  targeting  the  nucleoprotein; vRNA was not detected in ovaries or testes from 5 survivors without overt signs, whereas low levels of vRNA were detected in 4/4 ovaries (78.4-270 copies/ µL) and 4/5 testes (15-50 copies/µL) of 9 survivors after overt disease.

## Discussion

Using guinea pig models of both lethal and nonlethal LF, we characterized reproductive tissue tropism and associated  histopathologic  changes.  In  lethal  cases, we  found  widespread  reproductive  tract  infection, but pathology was often subtle or nonspecific, where -as survivors exhibited minimal pathology and no ISH or IHC staining. Furthermore, after infection with a known lethal strain, vRNA was detected in reproductive tract tissues early in infection, preceding the onset of clinical signs or tissue inflammation.

The overall paucity of inflammation in LASV in -fection could reflect the ability of LASV to replicate in dendritic cells and macrophages and create immuneprivileged  reservoirs  that  enable  unchecked  LASV

## RESEARCH

Figure 8. Detection of viral antigens and RNA by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) in reproductive tissues from strain 13/N guinea pigs serially euthanized 4-16 dpi after LASV strain Josiah infection in study of guinea pig model for infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. IHC and ISH chromogens are red. Panels A-G depict samples from female guinea pigs; panels H-L depict samples from male guinea pigs. A) Uterus (4 dpi), ISH. Rare staining in the endometrial stroma (arrow), without inflammation. B) Endocervix (4 dpi), ISH. Staining of the apical surface of an endocervical epithelial cell (asterisk) and beneath the basilar epithelium (arrow), without inflammation. C) Ovary (8 dpi), IHC. Staining in granulosa lutein cells (arrow) of a corpus luteum without inflammation. D) Uterus (8dpi), IHC. Staining in endometrial stromal cells (arrow) without inflammation. E) Ovary (12 dpi), ISH. Staining in theca interstitial cells (asterisk) and endothelium (arrow). F) Uterus (12 dpi), IHC. Endometrial stromal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and staining in endometrial stromal (asterisk) and epithelial (arrows) cells. G) Ovary (16 dpi), IHC. Staining in granulosa cells (asterisk) and endothelium (arrow). H) Epididymis (8 dpi), IHC. Staining in peritubular interstitial mesenchymal cells (arrow). I) Seminal vesicle (12 dpi), ISH. Staining in the wall of a small interstitial vessel (arrow).

J) Testis (12 dpi), ISH. Rare granular staining of viral RNA in the interstitium (white arrow) and in a vascular lumen (arrow). K, L) Epididymis (16 dpi), ISH. Extensive staining in tubular epithelium (arrows) and within tubular lumens, including spermatozoa (asterisk). Original magnifications × 40 (panels A, C, D, F, G, H, J, L), × 63 (panels B, I), × 10 (panel E), × 4 (panel K).

<!-- image -->

replication early in infection and subsequent systemic spread, including to the reproductive tract ( 28 , 32 , 33 ). We detected viral antigen and RNA in multiple reproductive tissues and cell types in male and female animals, including in tissue and cell types previously described  for  guinea  pigs  ( 32 ).  ISH,  which  detects vRNA, was more sensitive than IHC, which detects viral  protein;  among  36  positive  tissues  on  which both IHC and ISH were performed, results were ISH positive and IHC negative for 18 (50%). That finding indicates that viral RNA might persist or be detectable in tissues even when protein expression is below the  threshold  of  IHC  detection.  In  female  animals, vRNA detection was earliest and most abundant in uteri and ovaries; for male animals, vRNA detection was  earliest  and  most  extensive  in  epididymides. Whether LASV has a specific tropism for these tissues or whether their apparent preferential infection is the result of hemodynamic factors during viremia is unclear. At peak viremia, staining was predominantly,

but not exclusively, localized in tissues with inflam -matory changes; however, staining was also seen in tissues without overt pathology. Mesenchymal cells (interstitial  stromal  cells  and  smooth  muscle  cells) were affected earlier and more commonly than epithelial  cells  (granulosa  cells,  endometrial  glands, mammary  glands,  epididymal  epithelium  and  endothelial  cells),  suggesting  that  infected  fibroblasts could be involved in immune activation and modulation in LASV infection ( 34 ).

Conversely, in surviving animals, mild inflamma -tion was sometimes present, but vRNA and antigen were not detected by ISH and IHC. However, lowlevel vRNA was detected by qRT-PCR in about half of  survivor  gonadal  tissues,  exclusively  in  animals that had exhibited overt clinical signs. Those findings suggest substantial viral clearance from reproductive tissues by 42 dpi, although clearance may be incomplete, particularly in more severe cases. Shedding of LASV by humans can be prolonged; even after recovery,  virus  remains  infective  in  body  fluids,  includ -ing semen, vaginal fluid, urine, and breast milk for long periods ( 12 , 19 , 20 ). Although we did not directly test genital fluids in this study, IHC or ISH staining was detected in tissues that contribute to genital flu -ids (testes, epididymides, male accessory sex glands, cervix/vagina)  at  the  latest  timepoints  examined (23-26  dpi)  in  lethally  infected  animals.  Altogether, our findings indicate a window of potential risk for sexual  transmission  of  as  early  as  4  dpi,  before  the onset of clinical signs, and extending up to 3-4 weeks, or  possibly  longer,  after  infection,  underscoring  the

<!-- image -->

Figure 9. Histopathologic findings in reproductive tissues from strain 13/N guinea pig survivors of Lassa virus strain Josiah infection at 42 days postinfection (dpi) in study of guinea pig model for Lassa virus infection of reproductive tract and considerations for sexual and vertical transmission. Panels A-D depict samples from female guinea pigs; panels E-F depict male samples from male guinea pigs. A) Ovary (42 dpi) with lymphoplasmacytic inflammation in the stroma (asterisk). B) Oviduct (42 dpi) with focal perivascular and interstitial inflammation (arrow). C) Uterus (42 dpi) with endometrial stromal lymphoplasmacytic inflammation (asterisk) around glands. D) Vagina (42 dpi) with lymphocytic inflammation (arrows) around vessels in the vaginal wall. E) Epididymis (42 dpi) with dense perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammation around a vessel (white arrow) and heterophils within tubular lumens (black arrows). F) Penile connective tissue (42 dpi) with perivascular lymphocytic inflammation (arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin stain. Original magnification × 40 (panels A-C, E, F) ×10 (panel D).

need for continued research on LASV persistence in reproductive tissues and factors influencing the dura -tion of detection.

Our findings have implications for reproductive health,  including  fertility  and  pregnancy  outcomes, and suggest the potential for both sexual and vertical  LASV transmission. We detected LASV in ovarian thecal and granulosa cells, which are the cells that differentiate into the corpus luteum and secrete progesterone that is essential for early pregnancy maintenance in both guinea pigs and humans ( 23 ). Ovarian infection might lead to early pregnancy loss because of  virus-induced  progesterone  insufficiency  and  to detrimental effects not only on a current pregnancy but on future fertility ( 35 ). In uteri, we observed uterine  vascular,  stromal,  and  epithelial  LASV  staining, which  has  also  been  previously  reported  in  guinea pigs for LASV and filoviral infections ( 32 , 36 ). We did not  investigate  placentas,  but  others  have  reported high human placental viral LASV titers and demonstrated viral antigen in trophoblasts ( 21 , 22 ). Our data indicating LASV predilection for the uterus suggest high risk for direct placental infection, with potential for  placental  compromise  and  transplacental  transmission to the fetus.

Male  reproductive  tract  infections  can  also  be related to infertility and fetal infection. In our study, viral detection in testes was limited to rare interstitial cells and occurred without associated pathology, possibly because LASV does not principally target the  testes  or  possibly  because  of  the  restriction  of viral  replication  by  testicular  cells  with  innate  antiviral  properties  ( 37 ).  Epididymides showed more consistent pathology and LASV staining, including epididymal epithelial and interstitial mesenchymal cell staining, as well as apparent staining of leukocytes and intraluminal spermatozoa. Together with occasional staining observed in seminal vesicle and prostate,  those  findings  indicate  potential  for  in -fection of both spermatozoa and seminal fluid. Al -though the immune-privileged environment of the testis  and  epididymis  is  capable  of  local  defense against microbial pathogens, it also provides a microbial escape from immune surveillance and could prevent or delay clearance; potentially, adverse effects on male fertility, as well as sexual transmission, even after long periods postinfection, could be possible ( 38 , 39 ).

Breastfeeding  poses  another  potential  risk  for LASV transmission to infants. Shedding in milk and high viral titers with viral immunostaining in mammary  glandular  tissue  has  been  demonstrated  in humans ( 21 , 22 ). In addition, natural and experimental infections through skin exposure have been reported ( 13 -17 , 40 ). We found viral antigen and RNA localized to both mammary glandular epithelium and overlying  epidermis,  indicating  that  both  milk  and  skin contact might be possible sources of infant infection during  breastfeeding.  However,  no  specific  study links  breastfeeding  to  LASV  transmission,  and  our findings only highlight the need for additional inter -disciplinary research and surveillance efforts to understand these risks.

In  conclusion,  our  findings  in  a  guinea  pig model demonstrate that  LASV  infects  both  female and male reproductive tracts as early as 4 dpi, indicating a potential risk for early sexual and vertical  transmission,  including  through  breastfeeding, even  during  the  incubation  period  before  clinical signs  are  apparent.  This  model  further  suggests that  transmission  risk  could  persist  for  at  least  4 weeks  and  possibly  longer,  warranting  additional studies  of  human  cases  to  better  inform  evidencebased guidance for survivors regarding abstinence or  protected-sex practices as part of behavioral interventions  to  reduce  transmission,  considerations that are particularly relevant given the current lack of available LASV-specific vaccines or therapeutics. More broadly, this study highlights critical gaps in our understanding of long-term sequelae and tissue reservoirs for LASV and other viral hemorrhagic fevers in survivors, as well as the need for focused investigation into infection during pregnancy and its effects on maternal, placental, and fetal health. Such knowledge is  essential  for  refining  survivor  coun -seling,  infection  prevention  strategies,  and  public health preparedness in LASV-endemic settings.

## Acknowledgments

We thank members of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Comparative Medicine Branch, Office of Laboratory Systems and Response, for assisting with care for the animals and Tatyana Klimova for assistance editing the manuscript.

This work was supported in part by Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) grant number HDTRA1241740 made to the Emory Institute for Drug Development and CDC (CB11079, Evaluation of the anti-arenavirus activity of EIDD small molecules, both in vitro and in vivo, and investigation of mechanisms of action and resistance profiles); by DTRA contract MCDC2005-005 to EIDD (Identification and Development of Broadly Active Antiviral Countermeasures for Alphavirus, Arenavirus, and Other Biodefense Threats); and CDC Emerging Infectious Disease Research Core Funds.

## About the Author

Dr. Seixas is a veterinary pathologist in the Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, at CDC. Her research interests include animal models of human infectious disease caused by high-consequence pathogens.

## References:

1. Ahmad M, Ahmed I, Satapathy P, Asumah MN, Padhi BK. Re-emergence of the Lassa virus in Africa: a global health concern. Int J Surg. 2023;109:1044-5. https://doi.org/ 10.1097/JS9.0000000000000248
2. McCormick JB, King IJ, Webb PA, Johnson KM, O'Sullivan R, Smith ES, et al. A case-control study of the clinical diagnosis and course of Lassa fever. J Infect Dis. 1987;155:445-55. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/155.3.445
3. White HA. Lassa fever. A study of 23 hospital cases. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1972;66:390-401. https://doi.org/10.1016/0035-9203(72)90269-6
4. Okokhere PO, Ibekwe TS, Akpede GO. Sensorineural hearing loss in Lassa fever: two case reports. J Med Case Rep. 2009;3:36. https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-1947-3-36
5. Mateer EJ, Huang C, Shehu NY, Paessler S. Lassa feverinduced sensorineural hearing loss: a neglected public health and social burden. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018;12:e0006187. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0006187
6. Cummins D, McCormick JB, Bennett D, Samba JA, Farrar B, Machin SJ, et al. Acute sensorineural deafness in Lassa fever. JAMA. 1990;264:2093-6. https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000000849
7. World Health Organization. Lassa fever [cited 2024 Nov 8]. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ lassa-fever
8. Keane E, Gilles HM. Lassa fever in Panguma Hospital, Sierra Leone, 1973-6. Br Med J. 1977;1:1399-402. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.1.6073.1399
9. Kayem ND, Benson C, Aye CYL, Barker S, Tome M, Kennedy S, et al. Lassa fever in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2020;114:385-96. https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/traa011
10. Okogbenin S, Okoeguale J, Akpede G, Colubri A, Barnes KG, Mehta S, et al. Retrospective cohort study of Lassa fever in pregnancy, southern Nigeria. Emerg Infect Dis. 2019;25:1494500. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2508.181299
11. Murphy HL, Ly H. Pathogenicity and virulence mechanisms of Lassa virus and its animal modeling, diagnostic, prophylactic, and therapeutic developments. Virulence. 2021;12:2989-3014. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 21505594.2021.2000290
12. Thielebein A, Ighodalo Y, Taju A, Olokor T, Omiunu R, Esumeh R, et al. Virus persistence after recovery from acute Lassa fever in Nigeria: a 2-year interim analysis of a prospective longitudinal cohort study. Lancet Microbe. 2022; 3:e32-40. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(21)00178-6
13. Garnett LE, Strong JE. Lassa fever: with 50 years of study, hundreds of thousands of patients and an extremely high disease burden, what have we learned? Curr Opin Virol. 2019;37:123-31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2019.07.009
14. Lecompte E, Fichet-Calvet E, Daffis S, Koulémou K, Sylla O, Kourouma F, et al. Mastomys natalensis and Lassa fever, West Africa. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12:1971-4. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1212.060812

## Guinea Pig Model for Lassa Virus Infection

15. Mari Saez A, Cherif Haidara M, Camara A, Kourouma F, Sage M, Magassouba N, et al. Rodent control to fight Lassa fever: evaluation and lessons learned from a 4-year study in Upper Guinea. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018;12:e0006829. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0006829
16. Monath TP, Newhouse VF, Kemp GE, Setzer HW, Cacciapuoti A. Lassa virus isolation from Mastomys natalensis rodents during an epidemic in Sierra Leone. Science. 1974;185:263-5. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.185.4147.263
17. Olayemi A, Cadar D, Magassouba N, Obadare A, Kourouma F, Oyeyiola A, et al. New hosts of the Lassa virus. Sci Rep. 2016;6:25280. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep25280
18. Dan-Nwafor CC, Ipadeola O, Smout E, Ilori E, Adeyemo A, Umeokonkwo C, et al. A cluster of nosocomial Lassa fever cases in a tertiary health facility in Nigeria: description and lessons learned, 2018. Int J Infect Dis. 2019;83:88-94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2019.03.030
19. Richmond JK, Baglole DJ, Baglole DJ, Baglole DJ. Lassa fever: epidemiology, clinical features, and social consequences. BMJ. 2003;327:1271-5. https://doi.org/ 10.1136/bmj.327.7426.1271
20. Salu OB, Amoo OS, Shaibu JO, Abejegah C, Ayodeji O, Musa AZ, et al. Monitoring of Lassa virus infection in suspected and confirmed cases in Ondo State, Nigeria. Pan Afr Med J. 2020;36:253. https://doi.org/10.11604/ pamj.2020.36.253.22104
21. Shieh W-J, Demby A, Jones T, Goldsmith CS, Rollin PE, Ksiazek TG, et al. Pathology and pathogenesis of Lassa fever: novel immunohistochemical findings in fatal cases and clinico-pathologic correlation. Clin Infect Dis. 2022;74:182130. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab719
22. Walker DH, McCormick JB, Johnson KM, Webb PA, Komba-Kono G, Elliott LH, et al. Pathologic and virologic study of fatal Lassa fever in man. Am J Pathol. 1982; 107:349-56.
23. Morrison JL, Botting KJ, Darby JRT, David AL, Dyson RM, Gatford KL, et al. Guinea pig models for translation of the developmental origins of health and disease hypothesis into the clinic. J Physiol. 2018;596:5535-69. https://doi.org/ 10.1113/JP274948
24. Wulff H, Johnson KM. Immunoglobulin M and G responses measured by immunofluorescence in patients with Lassa or Marburg virus infections. Bull World Health Organ. 1979;57:631-5.
25. Albariño CG, Bird BH, Chakrabarti AK, Dodd KA, Erickson BR, Nichol ST. Efficient rescue of recombinant Lassa virus reveals the influence of S segment noncoding regions on virus replication and virulence. J Virol. 2011;85:4020-4. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02556-10
26. Welch SR, Scholte FEM, Albariño CG, Kainulainen MH, Coleman-McCray JD, Guerrero LW, et al. The S genome segment is sufficient to maintain pathogenicity in intra-clade Lassa virus reassortants in a guinea pig model. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018;8:240. https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00240
27. Reed LJ, Muench H. A simple method for estimating fifty percent endpoints. Am J Epidemiol. 1938;27:493-7.
28. Gary JM, Welch SR, Ritter JM, Coleman-McCray J, Huynh T, Kainulainen MH, et al. Lassa virus targeting of anterior uvea and endothelium of cornea and conjunctiva in eye of guinea pig model. Emerg Infect Dis. 2019;25:865-74. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2505.181254
29. Huynh T, Gary JM, Welch SR, Coleman-McCray J, Harmon JR, Kainulainen MH, et al. Lassa virus antigen distribution and inflammation in the ear of infected strain 13/N

## RESEARCH

- guinea pigs. Antiviral Res. 2020;183:104928. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104928
30. Welch SR, Genzer SC, Coleman-McCray JD, Harmon JR, Scholte FEM, Montgomery JM, et al. Viral RNA and infectious virus in mucosal specimens from guinea pigs modelling early phases of lethal and non-lethal Lassa fever. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2022;11:1390-3. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/22221751.2022.2071637
31. Kainulainen MH, Spengler JR, Welch SR, Coleman-McCray JD, Harmon JR, Scholte FEM, et al. Protection from lethal Lassa disease can be achieved both before and after virus exposure by administration of single-cycle replicating Lassa virus replicon particles. J Infect Dis. 2019;220:1281-9. https://doi.org/10.1093/ infdis/jiz284
32. Bell TM, Shaia CI, Bearss JJ, Mattix ME, Koistinen KA, Honnold SP, et al. Temporal progression of lesions in guinea pigs infected with Lassa virus. Vet Pathol. 2017;54:549-62. https://doi.org/10.1177/0300985816677153
33. Cornish EF, Filipovic I, Åsenius F, Williams DJ, McDonnell T. Innate immune responses to acute viral infection during pregnancy. Front Immunol. 2020;11:572567. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.572567
34. Davidson S, Coles M, Thomas T, Kollias G, Ludewig B, Turley S, et al. Fibroblasts as immune regulators in infection, inflammation and cancer. Nat Rev Immunol. 2021;21:704-17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-021-00540-z
35. Tomac J, Mazor M, Lisnić B, Golemac M, Kveštak D, Bralić M, et al. Viral infection of the ovaries compromises pregnancy and reveals innate immune mechanisms
- protecting fertility. Immunity. 2021;54:1478-1493.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2021.04.020
36. Cooper TK, Huzella L, Johnson JC, Rojas O, Yellayi S, Sun MG, et al. Histology, immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization reveal overlooked Ebola virus target tissues in the Ebola virus disease guinea pig model. Sci Rep. 2018;8:1250. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-19638-x
37. Zhao S, Zhu W, Xue S, Han D. Testicular defense systems: immune privilege and innate immunity. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014;11:428-37. https://doi.org/10.1038/cmi.2014.38
38. Zhao H, Yu C, He C, Mei C, Liao A, Huang D. The immune characteristics of the epididymis and the immune pathway of the epididymitis caused by different pathogens. Front Immunol. 2020;11:2115. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fimmu.2020.02115
39. Wang F, Zhang J, Wang Y, Chen Y, Han D. Viral tropism for the testis and sexual transmission. Front Immunol. 2022;13:1040172. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022. 1040172
40. Port JR, Wozniak DM, Oestereich L, Pallasch E, Becker-Ziaja B, Müller J, et al. Severe human Lassa fever is characterized by nonspecific t-cell activation and lymphocyte homing to inflamed tissues. J Virol. 2020;94:e01367-20. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01367-20

Address for correspondence: J.M. Ritter, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd NE, Mailstop H18-SB, Atlanta, GA 30329-4018, USA; email: vtr0@cdc.gov

## etymologia revisited

Originally published in May 2006

<!-- image -->

## Tuberculosis

[too-ber′′ku-lo′sis]

A ny  of  the  infectious  diseases  of  humans  or  other  animals caused by bacteria of the genus Mycobacterium .  From  the  Latin tuberculum, 'small swelling,' the diminutive form of tuber, 'lump.' Tuberculosis has existed in humans since antiquity; it is believed to have  originated  with  the  first  domestication  of  cattle.  Evidence  of tuberculosis has been shown in human  skeletal remains and mummies  from  as  early  as  4000 bc . Mycobacterium  bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin  has  been  successfully  used  to  immunize  humans since 1921, and treatment (rather than prevention) of tuberculosis has been possible since the introduction of streptomycin in 1946. Hopes of completely eliminating the disease, however, have been diminished since the rise of drug-resistant M. tuberculosis strains in the 1980s.

## Reference

1. Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary. 30th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;  2003;
2. Merriam-Webster's collegiate dictionary. 11th ed. Springfield (MA): Merriam-Webster Incorporated; 2003.
3. http://www.wikipedia.org

https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/5/et-1205\_article