<!-- image -->

Weight gain is a natural part of pregnancy. It helps your baby grow and develop and prepares your body for breast/chestfeeding. Weight gain needs vary by the individual. Gaining the amount of weight your body needs can help lower the risk of health problems during pregnancy and at delivery.

## WHAT IS A HEALTHY WEIGHT?

You can use the information below as a general guide, but it is best to review your weight gain goal with your doctor.

## HOW MUCH SHOULD I GAIN?

| Your Pre-Pregnant Weight   | Recommended Pregnancy Weight Gain   | Goals for 2nd and 3rd Trimesters   |
|----------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Underweight                | 28-40 pounds                        | 1 to 1 ½ pounds per week           |
| Healthy Weight             | 25-35 pounds                        | About 1 pound per week             |
| Overweight                 | 11-25 pounds                        | ½ to ¾ pounds per week             |

## WHERE DOES THE WEIGHT GAIN GO?

## Weight Goes to:

## Pounds Gained:

Breasts

Blood

Uterus (womb)

Amniotic Fluid

Placenta

Baby

Fluid

Maternal Tissue

1 lb

3 ½ lbs

1-3 ½ lbs

2 lbs

1 ½ lbs

8 ½ lbs

3-6 lbs

8-10 lbs

<!-- image -->

## TIPS TO HELP YOU GAIN A HEALTHY AMOUNT OF WEIGHT:

- Listen to your body. Eat when you are hungry and stop when you are full. Energy needs after the first trimester increase by about 200-400 calories per day. A glass of milk and half a sandwich would provide these extra calories.
- Adjust your eating schedule as needed. You may feel hungry more often during the day but get full quickly. Try eating 5 to 6 small meals a day.
- Your baby needs good nutrition to grow well. Focus on nutrient-rich foods such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, eggs, low-fat dairy, beans, and lean meats and proteins.
- Try some new foods for snacks. Nuts, yogurt, dried fruits, and veggies and dip are nutritious options that can satisfy cravings for salty and sweet snacks.
- Check out other food resources if you are having a hard time buying foods you need during pregnancy. Ask your WIC staff for other food resources or call 2-1-1.
- Be active at least 30 minutes a day, unless your doctor has told you to limit exercise. Walking, yoga, and swimming are great pregnancy exercises that can help you feel more energetic, have less back pain, and make delivery easier. Check for exercise classes in your community.
- Take care of yourself. Minimize stress. Ask for help when needed.

Visit MyPlate.gov to create a personalized food plan that is right for you.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->