<!-- image -->

Minnesota Paid Leave

## Medical L eave certification form

## Note about leave for your pregnancy

If you will be taking continuous Medical Leave due to pregnancy or recovery from birth AND Bonding Leave to bond with your newborn right after recovering from the birth, use the Pregnancy-related Medical Leave c ertification form instead.

## This form has four sections:

1. Applicant information
2. Health condition information
3. Leave information
4. Healthcare provider certification

## How to complete this form:

The form can be filled out digitally or printed and filled out by hand.

1. Complete the applicant information section.
2. Give this form to the healthcare provider who is treating you. Page 7 lists the kind of healthcare providers eligible to complete this form.
3. The healthcare provider will complete the health condition information, leave information, and healthcare provider certification sections and return the form to you.
4. There are several ways to get your form to us.
- a. If you have completed this form digitally, you can upload the completed file online at paidleave.mn.gov.
- b. If you printed the form, you can upload photos or a scan of the completed form.
- c. Your provider could fax the form to Paid Leave at 651-705-0252 .
- d. If you don't have a way to upload the form online, reach out to the Paid Leave Contact Center by calling 651-556-7777 or 844-556-0444 (toll-free), or by emailing PaidLeave@state.mn.us.

DEED is an equal opportunity employer and program provider. This information can be provided in alternative formats to people with disabilities or people needing language assistance by calling 651-566-7777 or 844-556-0444.

<!-- image -->

## 1. Applicant Information

Instructions: Complete this section with the applicant's information.

- Applicant name 1

Write your name as it appears on official documents like a state ID, driver's license, or W-2 form.

First

Middle (optional)

Last

- Date of birth 3

/

/

Month

Day

Year

- Phone number 4

-

-

- Residential address 5

City

State

Zip code

Note: This is optional. If you mail the form, we will use this information to match it to your application.

Address line 1

Address line 2 (optional)

- To take Medical Leave, your serious health condition must prevent you for completing at least one essential job function. Check the types of job functions you are or will be unable to do: 6

- [ ] Physical duties like standing, lifting, climbing, balancing, traveling, commuting, and repetitive motions

- [ ] Cognitive duties like planning, concentrating, writing, decision-making, problem solving, and facilitation

- [ ] Other:

- Last 4 digits of your Social Security Number (SSN) or your Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN) 2

SSN or ITIN

- By signing, I authorize the healthcare provider who completes this form to confirm with Minnesota Paid Leave that the information is correct. 7

/

/

Month

Day

Year

Date:

Signature:

MNPL MedicalCert v 4, Jan 2026

<!-- image -->

## 2. Health condition information

This page should be filled out by a healthcare provider.

Instructions: For the patient to qualify for Paid Leave, they must have a serious health condition. This is defined as an illness, injury, impairment, or condition (including mental health conditions, pregnancy, or substance use disorders) that affects a person's physical or mental health. Answer all questions fully and completely.

<!-- image -->

Which of the following apply to the patient's serious health condition? Check all that apply.

- [ ] Requires, or did require, inpatient care.

- [ ] The condition is pregnancy or related to pregnancy. The expected delivery date is (mm/dd/yyyy).

- [ ] Has incapacitated or will incapacitate the patient for more than 7 calendar days in a row AND requires one of the following:

Select one

- [ ] Two or more medical visits within 30 days.

OR

- [ ] One medical visit, plus a regimen of care.

- [ ] Is chronic, will continue over time, requires treatment at least twice a year, and may require periodic absences.

- [ ] Is long-term and requires ongoing medical supervision, with or without active treatment.

- [ ] Requires multiple treatments and/or recovery from treatments due to:

Select one

- [ ] Restorative surgery after an accident or injury

OR

- [ ] A condition that would lead to a period of incapacity without treatment.

- [ ] None of the above. Note: If selected, the patient does not qualify for Paid Leave.

1

/

/

Month

Day

Year

- State the approximate date the condition started or will start. 2

- Provide your best estimate of how long the condition lasted or will last (e.g., number of years, months, weeks, or days.) 3

Healthcare provider initials

MNPL MedicalCert v 4, Jan 2026

<!-- image -->

## 2. Health condition information (cont.)

This page should be filled out by a healthcare provider.

If needed, briefly describe other appropriate medical facts related to the condition(s) for which the applicant is seeking leave. (e.g., use of nebulizer, dialysis)

4

- Do you agree that the patient cannot or will not be able to do the type(s) of job duties they indicated in section 1 of this medical certification form? 5

- [ ] Yes

- [ ] No

- Is this serious health condition a job-related injury? 6

- [ ] Yes

- [ ] No

Healthcare provider initials

MNPL MedicalCert v 4, Jan 2026

<!-- image -->

## 3. Leave information

This page should be filled out by a healthcare provider.

Instructions: The applicant's healthcare provider should complete this section. The following questions are about the frequency or duration of a condition. Check all that apply to the patient's serious health condition, which is defined as an illness, injury, impairment, or condition (including mental health conditions, pregnancy, or substance use disorders) that affects a person's physical health, mental health, or both.

<!-- image -->

Answer all questions fully and completely.

Note:

Do not use terms like unknown or TBD.

Continuous Leave: Is/will the patient be incapacitated for a continuous period of time and completely unable to work for consecutive, uninterrupted days due to their condition?

Provide your best estimate of the duration of the period of incapacity:

1

- Reduced Leave: Is it medically beneficial for the patient to work a reduced, but consistent schedule due to their 2

condition?

Provide your best estimate of the time that the patient should take off per week during the following dates:

- [ ] Intermittent: Is it medically beneficial for the patient to be absent from work on an intermittent basis (multiple episodes of time off, which may be irregular or unexpected) due to their condition?

Provide your best estimate of the frequency and duration of the episodes of incapacity during the following dates:

3

Start date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

End date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

Start date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

End date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

The patient is/will not able to work

(        hours /        days) per week.

Start date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

End date:

(mm/dd/yyyy)

Episodes of incapacity are estimated to occur

- [ ] times per (        day /        week /        month).

Episodes of incapacity are estimated to last

- [ ] (        hours /        days).

Describe how this intermittent leave is medically beneficial to the patient given their medical condition. Your answers should be based on your medical knowledge of and experience with the patient.

Healthcare provider initials

MNPL MedicalCert v 4, Jan 2026

<!-- image -->

## 4. Healthcare provider certification

This page should be filled out by a healthcare provider.

Instructions: Provide the relevant licensing and contact information about your practice. Sign and date to certify this leave application. After signing, return the form to the patient.

- Provider's name 1

First

Middle (optional)

Last

- Title and area of practice or medical specialty 2

- Contact information 3

-

-

City

State

Zip code

Office mailing address line 1

Office mailing address line 2 (optional)

Office Fax

-

-

Office Phone

Note:

The form will not be accepted unless a license number is provided.

- License or practice number 4

License or practice number

State / country

By signing below, I certify the following:

- The patient is receiving medical care related to their serious health condition and is unable to perform regular work due to their medical condition or required treatment.

- I have answered all questions as true and complete to the best of my knowledge, experience, and belief.

- I am a healthcare provider who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized under law to certify the patient's condition within my scope of practice.

/

/

Date:

Signature:

/

/

Month

Day

Year

Date:

Signature:

<!-- image -->

## Definition of a serious health condition

A serious health condition is an illness, injury, impairment, condition, or substance use disorder that affects a person's physical health, mental health, or both. Visit paidleave.mn.gov to learn more about how Paid leave defines a serious health condition.

A serious health condition must involve at least one of the following:

1. inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility, including any period of incapacity
- a. What is inpatient care? An overnight stay in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility. This includes any period of incapacity, or any follow-up treatment resulting from the inpatient care.
- b. What is incapacity? Incapacity happens when a person is unable to perform their job functions because of the serious health condition.

## 2. continuing treatment or supervision by a healthcare provider

- a. What is continuing treatment or supervision? Continuing treatment or supervision by a health care provider must include one or more of the following:
- i. seven or more days of incapacity, and any treatment or period of incapacity related to the same condition after the initial timeframe a period of incapacity due to medical care related to pregnancy
- ii. a period of incapacity or treatment for a chronic health condition
- iii. a permanent or long-term period of incapacity due to treatment that may not be effective
- iv. a period of absence to receive multiple treatments; this can include any period of recovery from the treatments. You must receive treatments from your healthcare provider, or someone who provides healthcare services that your doctor ordered or referred to to provide treatment.

## Definition of a healthcare provider

A healthcare provider is an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized under law to practice in the individual's scope of practice as a:

- physician, physician assistant, Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.)
- nurse practitioner, advanced practice registered nurse, nurse-midwife
- licensed midwife
- dentist
- optometrist
- chiropractors (limited to treatment consisting of manual manipulation of the spine to correct a subluxation as demonstrated by X-ray to exist)
- podiatrist
- surgeon
- advanced practice registered nurse
- clinical psychologist, clinical social worker
- an alcohol and drug counselor as defined by the State of Minnesota
- a mental health professional as defined by the State of Minnesota

Any healthcare provider from whom an employer or the employer's group health plan's benefits manager will accept certification of the existence of a serious health condition to substantiate a claim for benefits.

A healthcare provider listed above who practices in a country other than the United States, who is authorized to practice in accordance with the law of that country, and who is performing within the scope of his or her practice as defined under such law.

Christian Science Practitioners listed with the First Church of Christ, Scientist in Boston, Massachusetts.

Any other individual determined by the commissioner by rule, in accordance with the rule-making procedures in the Administrative Procedure Act, to be capable of providing healthcare services.

<!-- image -->

## 651-556-7777 or 844-556-0444

Attention: If you need free help interpreting this document, call the above number.

ያስተውሉ፡ ካለምንም ክፍያ ይህንን ዶኩመንት የሚተረጉምሎ አስተርጓሚ ከፈለጉ ከላይ ወደተጻፈው የስልክ ቁጥር ይደውሉ።

.ﻣﻼﺣظﺔ: إذا أردت ﻣﺳﺎﻋدة ﻣﺟﺎﻧﯾﺔ ﻟﺗرﺟﻣﺔ ھذه اﻟوﺛﯾﻘﺔ، اﺗﺻل ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟرﻗم أﻋﻼه

သတိ။ ဤစာရြက္စာတမးအားအခမဲ့ဘာသာပျန်ပေးချင်း အကူအညီလိုအပ်ပါက၊ အထကက်ပါဖုန်းနံပါတ်ကိုခေါ်ဆိုပါ။ 請注意，如果您需要免費協助傳譯這份文件，請撥打上面的電話號碼。

Attention. Si vous avez besoin d'une aide gratuite pour interpréter le présent document, veuillez appeler au numéro ci-dessus.

Thov ua twb zoo nyeem. Yog hais tias koj xav tau kev pab txhais lus rau tsab ntaub ntawv no pub dawb, ces hu rau tus najnpawb xov tooj saum toj no.

알려드립니다 . 이 문서에 대한 이해를 돕기 위해 무료로 제공되는 도움을 받으시려면 위의전화번호로 연락하십시오 .

້

ໂປຣດຊາບ. ຖ າຫາກ ທ ່ ານຕ ອງການການຊ ່ ວຍເຫ ຼື  ອໃນການແປເອກະສານນ ຟຣ ,  ຈ ົ ່ ງໂທຣໄປທ ີ ່   ໝາຍເລກຂ າງເທ ີ ງນ .

້

ີ

້

ີ

້

ີ

້

Hubachiisa. Dokumentiin kun bilisa akka siif hiikamu gargaarsa hoo feete, lakkoobsa gubbatti kenname bibili.

Внимание: если вам нужна бесплатная помощь в устном переводе данного документа, позвоните по указанному выше телефону.

Digniin.  Haddii  aad  u  baahantahay  caawimaad  lacag-la'aan  ah ee tarjumaadda  qoraalkan,  lambarka  kore  wac. Atención.  Si  desea  recibir  asistencia  gratuita  para  interpretar  este  documento,  llame  al  número  indicado  arriba. Chú ý. Nếu quý vị cần được giúp đỡ dịch tài liệu này miễn phí, xin gọi số bên trên.

<!-- image -->

For accessible formats of this publication and additional equal access to services, write to DEED.ODEO@state.mn.us, call 651-259-7094, or use your preferred relay service. (ADA1 [9-15])