## Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS)

Phase 5 Core Questionnaire

First, we would like to ask a few questions about you and the time before you got pregnant with your new baby. Please check the box next to your answer.

1. Just before you got pregnant, did you have health insurance? Do not count Medicaid.

No

Yes

2. Just before you got pregnant, were you on Medicaid?

No Yes

3. During the month before you got pregnant with your new baby, how many times a week did you take a multivitamin or a prenatal vitamin? These are pills that contain many different vitamins and minerals.

I didn't take a multivitamin or a prenatal vitamin at all

1 to 3 times a week 4 to 6 times a week Every day of the week

4. What is your date of birth?

```
[BOX] [BOX] 19[BOX] Month Day Year
```

5. Just before you got pregnant with your new baby, how much did you weigh?

```
[BOX] Pounds OR [BOX] Kilos
```

6. How tall are you without shoes?

```
[BOX] Feet [BOX] Inches OR [BOX] Centimeters
```

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L10

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L17

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L11

7. Before you got pregnant with your new baby, did you ever have any other babies who were born alive?

```
No ≡ Go to Question 10 Yes
```

8. Did the baby born just before your new one weigh 5 pounds, 8 ounces (2.5 kilos) or less at birth?

No Yes

9. Was the baby just before your new one born more than 3 weeks before its due date?

No Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) P7-P8

## The next questions are about the time when you got pregnant with your new baby.

10. Thinking back to just before you got pregnant with your new baby, how did you feel about becoming pregnant? Check one answer

I wanted to be pregnant sooner I wanted to be pregnant later I wanted to be pregnant then I didn't want to be pregnant then or at any time in the future

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) Q4

11. When you got pregnant with your new baby, were you trying to get pregnant?

No Yes ≡ Go to Question 14

12. When you got pregnant with your new baby, were you or your husband or partner doing anything to keep from getting pregnant? (Some things people do to keep from getting pregnant include not having sex at certain times [rhythm] or withdrawal, and using birth control methods such as the pill, condoms, cervical ring, IUD, having their tubes tied, or their partner having a vasectomy.)

No Yes ≡ Go to Question 14

2

## 13. What were your or your husband's or partner's reasons for not doing anything to keep from getting pregnant? Check all that apply

I didn't mind if I got pregnant I thought I could not get pregnant at that time I had side effects from the birth control method I was using I had problems getting birth control when I needed it I thought my husband or partner or I was sterile (could not get pregnant at all) My husband or partner didn't want to use anything Other ≡ Please tell us:

[BOX]

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) E3

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) A1-A3

The next questions are about the prenatal care you received during your most recent pregnancy. Prenatal care includes visits to a doctor, nurse, or other health care worker before your baby was born to get checkups and advice about pregnancy. (It may help to look at the calendar when you answer these questions.)

14. How many weeks or months pregnant were you when you were sure you were pregnant? (For example, you had a pregnancy test or a doctor or nurse said you were pregnant.)

[BOX] Weeks OR [BOX] Months

I don't remember

15. How many weeks or months pregnant were you when you had your first visit for prenatal care? Do not count a visit that was only for a pregnancy test or only for WIC (the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children).

[BOX] Weeks OR [BOX] Months

I didn't go for prenatal care

16. Did you get prenatal care as early in your pregnancy as you wanted?

No Yes I didn't want prenatal care ≡

Go to Question 18

17. Here is a list of problems some women can have getting prenatal care. For each item, circle Y (Yes) if it was a problem for you during your most recent pregnancy or circle N (No) if it was not a problem or did not apply to you.

No

I couldn't get an appointment when I wanted one .......................................................................  N

I didn't have enough money or insurance to pay for my visits ....................................................  N

I had no way to get to the clinic or doctor's office ......................................................................  N

I couldn't take time off from work ..............................................................................................  N

The doctor or my health plan would not start care as early as I wanted ......................................  N

I didn't have my Medicaid card  ...................................................................................................  N

I had no one to take care of my children  ......................................................................................  N

I had too many other things going on ..........................................................................................  N

I didn't want anyone to know I was pregnant  ..............................................................................  N

Other ............................................................................................................................................  N

Please tell us: [BOX]

## If you did not go for prenatal care, go to Page #, Question 20.

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) R15

## 18. How was your prenatal care paid for? Check all that apply

Medicaid Personal income (cash, check, or credit card) Health insurance or HMO (including insurance from your work or your husband's work) State-specific State-specific Other ≡ Please tell us:

## [BOX]

19. During any of your prenatal care visits, did a doctor, nurse, or other health care worker talk with you about any of the things listed below? Please count only discussions, not reading materials or videos. For each item, circle Y (Yes) if someone talked with you about it or circle N (No) if no one talked with you about it.

No

How smoking during pregnancy could affect my baby ...............................................................  N

Breastfeeding my baby ................................................................................................................  N

How drinking alcohol during pregnancy could affect my baby  ...................................................  N

Using a seat belt during my pregnancy  ........................................................................................  N

Birth control methods to use after my pregnancy ........................................................................  N

Medicines that are safe to take during my pregnancy  ..................................................................  N

How using illegal drugs could affect my baby ............................................................................  N

Doing tests to screen for birth defects or diseases that run in my family  .....................................  N

What to do if my labor starts early...............................................................................................  N

Getting tested for HIV (the virus that causes AIDS) ...................................................................  N

Physical abuse to women by their husbands or partners  ..............................................................  N

Yes

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Yes

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

h.

i.

j.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

h.

i.

j.

k.

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) R1-R4

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R12

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R14

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R5

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R13

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R9-R11

Insertion point for Standard question(s) R6-R8

20. At any time during your most recent pregnancy or delivery, did you have a test for HIV (the virus that causes AIDS)?

No Yes I don't know

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) I7

Insertion point for Standard question(s) I4-I6

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) I2-I3

Insertion point for Standard question(s) G5

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) G1-G4

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L12-L15

The next questions are about your most recent pregnancy and things that might have happened during your pregnancy.

21. During your most recent pregnancy, were you on WIC (the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children)?

No Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B7

## 22. Did you have any of these problems during your most recent pregnancy? For each item, circle Y (Yes) if you had the problem or circle N (No) if you did not.

|    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                | No   | Yes   |
|----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|-------|
| a. | High blood sugar (diabetes) that started before this pregnancy...................................................N                                                                                             |      | Y     |
| b. | High blood sugar (diabetes) that started during this pregnancy...................................................N                                                                                             |      | Y     |
| c. | Vaginal bleeding..........................................................................................................................N                                                                    |      | Y     |
| d. | Kidney or bladder (urinary tract) infection..................................................................................N                                                                                 |      | Y     |
| e. | Severe nausea, vomiting, or dehydration.....................................................................................N                                                                                  |      | Y     |
| f. | Cervix had to be sewn shut (incompetent cervix)........................................................................N                                                                                       |      | Y     |
| g. | High blood pressure, hypertension (including pregnancy-induced hypertension [PIH], preeclampsia, or toxemia).................................................................................................N |      | Y     |
| h. | Problems with the placenta (such as abruptio placentae or placenta previa) ..............................N                                                                                                     |      | Y     |
| i. | Labor pains more than 3 weeks before my baby was due (preterm or early labor) .....................N                                                                                                           |      | Y     |
| j. | Water broke more than 3 weeks before my baby was due (premature rupture of membranes [PROM]) ...............................................................................N                                  |      | Y     |
| k. | I had to have a blood transfusion .................................................................................................N                                                                           |      | Y     |
| l. | I was hurt in a car accident ..........................................................................................................N                                                                       |      | Y     |

## If you did not have any of these problems, go to Question 24.

23. Did you do any of the following things because of these problems? For each item, circle Y (Yes) if you did that thing or circle N (No) if you did not.

|    |                                                                                                                                | No   | Yes   |
|----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|-------|
| a. | I went to the hospital or emergency room and stayed less than 1 day .........................................N                 |      | Y     |
| b. | I went to the hospital and stayed 1 to 7 days ...............................................................................N |      | Y     |
| c. | I went to the hospital and stayed more than 7 days .....................................................................N      |      | Y     |
| d. | I stayed in bed at home more than 2 days because of my doctor's or nurse's advice..................N                           |      | Y     |

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) N1-N4

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) L4-L7

## The next questions are about smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol.

24. Have you smoked at least 100 cigarettes in the past 2 years ? (A pack has 20 cigarettes.)

No ≡ Go to Question 28 Yes

## 25. In the 3 months before you got pregnant, how many cigarettes did you smoke on an average day? (A pack has 20 cigarettes.)

- 41 cigarettes or more

21 to 40 cigarettes 11 to 20 cigarettes 6 to 10 cigarettes 1 to 5 cigarettes Less than 1 cigarette None (0 cigarettes)

## 26. In the last 3 months of your pregnancy, how many cigarettes did you smoke on an average day? (A pack has 20 cigarettes.)

- 41 cigarettes or more

21 to 40 cigarettes 11 to 20 cigarettes 6 to 10 cigarettes 1 to 5 cigarettes Less than 1 cigarette None (0 cigarettes)

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) AA6

## 27. How many cigarettes do you smoke on an average day now ? (A pack has 20 cigarettes.)

- 41 cigarettes or more

21 to 40 cigarettes 11 to 20 cigarettes 6 to 10 cigarettes 1 to 5 cigarettes Less than 1 cigarette

None (0 cigarettes)

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) U1-U2

28. Have you had any alcoholic drinks in the past 2 years ? (A drink is 1 glass of wine, wine cooler, can or bottle of beer, shot of liquor, or mixed drink.)

No ≡ Go to Question 31 Yes

## 29a. During the 3 months before you got pregnant, how many alcoholic drinks did you have in an average week?

14 drinks or more a week 7 to 13 drinks a week 4 to 6 drinks a week 1 to 3 drinks a week Less than 1 drink a week I didn't drink then

## 29b. During the 3 months before you got pregnant, how many times did you drink 5 alcoholic drinks or more in one sitting?

6 or more times

4 to 5 times

2 to 3 times

1 time

I didn't have 5 drinks or more in 1 sitting

I didn't drink then

## 30a. During the last 3 months of your pregnancy, how many alcoholic drinks did you have in an average week?

14 drinks or more a week 7 to 13 drinks a week 4 to 6 drinks a week 1 to 3 drinks a week Less than 1 drink a week I didn't drink then

## 30b. During the last 3 months of your pregnancy, how many times did you drink 5 alcoholic drinks or more in one sitting?

6 or more times

4 to 5 times

2 to 3 times

1 time

I didn't have 5 drinks or more in 1 sitting

I didn't drink then

9

## Pregnancy can be a difficult time for some women. The next questions are about things that may have happened before and during your most recent pregnancy.

## 31. This question is about things that may have happened during the 12 months before your new baby was born. For each item, circle Y (Yes) if it happened to you or circle N (No) if it did not. (It may help to use the calendar.)

## No Yes a. A close family member was very sick and had to go into the hospital ........................................  N Y b. I got separated or divorced from my husband or partner .............................................................  N Y c. I moved to a new address  .............................................................................................................  N Y d. I was homeless  .............................................................................................................................  N Y e. My husband or partner lost his job ..............................................................................................  N Y f. I lost my job even though I wanted to go on working .................................................................  N Y g. I argued with my husband or partner more than usual  .................................................................  N Y h. My husband or partner said he didn't want me to be pregnant ....................................................  N Y i. I had a lot of bills I couldn't pay  ..................................................................................................  N Y j. I was in a physical fight ...............................................................................................................  N Y k. I or my husband or partner went to jail  ........................................................................................  N Y l. Someone very close to me had a bad problem with drinking or drugs ........................................  N Y m. Someone very close to me died ...................................................................................................  N Y

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) P14-P16

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) BB1

## The next questions are about the time during the 12 months before you got pregnant with your new baby.

## 32a. During the 12 months before you got pregnant, did an ex-husband or ex-partner push, hit, slap, kick, choke, or physically hurt you in any other way?

## No Yes

## 32b. During the 12 months before you got pregnant, were you physically hurt in any way by your husband or partner?

No Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) Z3

The next questions are about the time during your most recent pregnancy.

33a. During your most recent pregnancy, did an ex-husband or ex-partner push, hit, slap, kick, choke, or physically hurt you in any other way?

No Yes

33b. During your most recent pregnancy, were you physically hurt in any way by your husband or partner?

No Yes

Insertion point for Standard question(s) Z4

Insertion point for Standard question(s) M7

The next questions are about your labor and delivery. (It may help to look at the calendar when you answer these questions.)

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) K1-K4

34.

When was your baby due?

- [BOX] Month

35.

- [BOX] Month
- [BOX] Day
- [BOX] Year

When did you go into the hospital to have your baby?

- [BOX] Day
- [BOX] Year

I didn't have my baby in a hospital

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) K5

36. [BOX]

When was your baby born?

[BOX] Day

- [BOX] Year

Month

## 37. When were you discharged from the hospital after your baby was born? (It may help to use the calendar.)

## [BOX] [BOX]

[BOX]

Month

Day

Year

I didn't have my baby in a hospital

## 38. How was your delivery paid for? Check all that apply

Medicaid

Personal income (cash, check, or credit card)

Health insurance or HMO (including insurance from your work or your husband's work)

State-specific

State-specific

Other ≡ Please tell us:

[BOX]

## The next questions are about the time since your new baby was born.

## 39. After your baby was born, was he or she put in an intensive care unit?

No

Yes

I don't know

## 40. After your baby was born, how long did he or she stay in the hospital?

Less than 24 hours (less than 1 day) 24 to 48 hours (1 to 2 days) 3 days 4 days 5 days 6 days or more My baby was not born in a hospital My baby is still in the hospital ≡ Go to Question 43

## 41. Is your baby alive now?

No ≡ Go to Question 51

```
Yes
```

## 42. Is your baby living with you now?

No ≡ Go to Question 51 Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B4

43. Did you ever breastfeed or pump breast milk to feed your new baby after delivery?

No ≡ Go to Question 47

Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B1

44. Are you still breastfeeding or feeding pumped milk to your new baby?

No

Yes ≡ Go to Question 46

45. How many weeks or months did you breastfeed or pump milk to feed your baby?

[BOX] Weeks OR [BOX] Months

Less than 1 week

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B2

46. How old was your baby the first time you fed him or her anything besides breast milk? Include formula, baby food, juice, cow's milk, water, sugar water, or anything else you fed your baby.

[BOX] Weeks OR [BOX] Months

My baby was less than 1 week old

I have not fed my baby anything besides breast milk

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B3

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) B5-B6

If your baby is still in the hospital, go to Page ##, Question 51.

47. About how many hours a day, on average, is your new baby in the same room with someone who is smoking?

[BOX] Hours

Less than 1 hour a day

My baby is never in the same room with someone who is smoking

48. How do you most often lay your baby down to sleep now? Check one answer
2. On his or her side

On his or her back

On his or her stomach

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) F1

49. Was your new baby seen by a doctor, nurse, or other health care worker during the first week after he or she left the hospital?

No

Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) X6

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) T4-T5

50. Has your new baby had a well-baby checkup? (A well-baby checkup is a regular health visit for your baby, usually at 2, 4, or 6 months of age.)

No

Yes

## Insertion point for Standard question(s) X7

Insertion point for Standard question(s) X8

Insertion point for Standard question(s) X4

Insertion point for Standard question(s) X1-X2

Insertion point for Standard question(s) X3

Insertion point for Standard question(s) X5

Insertion point for Standard question(s) T1-T3

Insertion point for Standard question(s) H1-H4

The next few questions are about the time since your new baby was born and things that may have happened after delivery.

51. Are you or your husband or partner doing anything now to keep from getting pregnant? (Some things people do to keep from getting pregnant include not having sex at certain times [rhythm] or withdrawal, and using birth control methods such as the pill, condoms, cervical ring, IUD, having their tubes tied, or their partner having a vasectomy.)

No

Yes ≡ Go to Question 53

52. What are your or your husband's or partner's reasons for not doing anything to keep from getting pregnant now ? Check all that apply

I am not having sex I want to get pregnant I don't want to use birth control My husband or partner doesn't want to use anything I don't think I can get pregnant (sterile) I can't pay for birth control I am pregnant now Other ≡ Please tell us:

[BOX]

Insertion point for Standard question(s) E1

Insertion point for Standard question(s) E2

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L8-L9

Insertion point for Standard question(s) L16

Insertion point for Standard question(s) O1-O3

53. During the 12 months before your new baby was born, what were the sources of your household's income? Check all that apply

Aid such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), welfare, WIC, public assistance, general assistance, food stamps, or Supplemental Security Income

Paycheck or money from a job Money from family or friends Money from a business, fees, dividends, or rental income Unemployment benefits Child support or alimony Social security, workers' compensation, disability, veteran benefits, or pensions Other ≡ Please tell us:

[BOX]

54. During the 12 months before your new baby was born, what was your total household income before taxes? Include your income, your husband's or partner's income, and any other income you may have used. (All information will be kept private and will not affect any services you are now getting.) Check one answer

Less than $10,000 $10,000 to $14,999 $15,000 to $19,999 $20,000 to $24,999 $25,000 to $34,999 $35,000 to $49,999 $50,000 or more

## 55. How many people, including yourself, depended on this income?

## [BOX] People

[STATE-SPECIFIC SECTION (Standards without insertion points and state-developed questions)]

## 56. What is today's date?

[BOX] [BOX] [BOX] Month Day Year

15

Please use this space for any additional comments you would like to make about the health of mothers and babies in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Thanks for answering our questions!

16

## Your answers will help us work to make \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ mothers and babies healthier.