## pregnancy to do checklist

## First Trimester (weeks 4-12)

-  Find an obstetrician.
-  Quit harmful habits that can affect your baby's development, such as smoking, drinking alcohol and using drugs.
-  Let your doctor know about all medications you're taking, including anything over-the-counter or herbal.
-  Avoid secondhand smoke.
-  Get plenty of rest.
-  Take a daily prenatal vitamin.
-  Schedule a dental cleaning.
-  Avoid hot tubs and saunas.
-  Schedule to take the Great Expectations pregnancy class in your first or early second trimester.
-  Sign up for free text messages throughout your pregnancy and your baby's first year at text4baby.org.
-  Start shopping for clothes one size larger.
-  Research childcare centers if you plan to return to work or school; many have long waiting lists.
-  Talk to your doctor if you're interested in genetic testing.
-  Schedule the Baby &amp; You Orientation Tour.
-  Follow safe food-handling recommendations.
-  Plan how and when you will announce your pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Second Trimester (weeks 13-27)

-  Look into prenatal yoga and exercise classes at Woman's Center for Wellness.
-  Get used to sleeping on your side now; it will help later as you get bigger. Sometimes it helps to use a few extra pillows. Consider using a 'pregnancy pillow' that supports your entire body.
-  Check your life insurance and health insurance plans to make sure there is enough coverage for your family. You may also want to update your will and name a guardian for your child.
-  Start searching for a doula if you plan on having one with you during labor and delivery. Talk to your doctor about your decision.
-  Plan something fun to do with your partner before baby arrives.
-  Decide with your partner if you want to know baby's gender.
-  If you're finding out baby's gender, start planning the big reveal! A gender-reveal party is a fun way to find out the gender with friends and family.
-  If you work, tell your employer the news so you can make arrangements for your absence/leaving.
-  Schedule a prenatal massage at Woman's Center for Wellness; this can alleviate pregnancy swelling and aches.
-  Work on an invitation list for your baby shower.
-  Prevent hemorrhoids by avoiding constipation.
-  Continue to drink plenty of fluids.
-  Schedule your childbirth classes.
-  Select a store and start registering for your baby gifts.
-  Start thinking of baby names.
-  Pamper yourself with a pedicure, soak in a warm bath, and watch your favorite movie.
-  Attend one of Woman's breastfeeding classes.
-  Start working on your labor preferences worksheet.
-  Start preparing the nursery.

## Third Trimester (weeks 28-40)

-  Plan your ride to the hospital. Choose an alternative driver if your partner can't get to you fast enough.
-  Make sure your family members are up-to-date on their vaccines.
-  Discuss birth control with your doctor for after delivery. You can get pregnant while you are breastfeeding!
-  Ask friends and family for pediatrician references, then schedule interviews.
-  Select your baby's pediatrician.
-  Spend quality time with your other children.
-  Book a photographer/videographer if you plan to have your Labor and Delivery captured by a professional.
-  Make sure you and your partner are clear about who will be in the delivery room. You will receive four visitor passes, which includes one for your support person. These four persons may be with you during labor. When it's time for you to push, only three visitors may be present (two for a C-section).
-  Start 'babyproofing' your home to protect baby from safety hazards.
-  Arrange for childcare for your older children for when you go into labor.
-  Purchase a baby keepsake book.
-  Review your labor preferences worksheet with your doctor.
-  Choose birth announcements and prepare a mailing list so you won't have to do this when baby is born. Woman's Graphic Services can design and print your announcements and other items at great rates and fast delivery. Call 225-924-8497 or email graphicservices@womans.org.
-  Prepare your pet for the baby. Expose your pet to children when possible. Be sure your pet is up-to-date on vaccinations. Put out baby's things and let your pet smell everything.
-  Decide where you want everyone to be during delivery (at your feet watching the delivery, at your head assisting you, etc.). Also, decide in advance if you want to see the baby come out with the mirror.

## Postnatal Care Supply List

-  Sanitary pads (large box)
-  Nursing bras or support bras
-  Nursing pads (even if you are not breastfeeding, you will leak until you dry up)
-  Breast/nipple ointment
-  Comfortable clothes (you will be in maternity clothes for some time after delivery)
-  Install the infant car seat and get it inspected by a professional Child Passenger Safety Technician.
-  Pre-register with Woman's OB Express so you will not have to complete paperwork when you are in labor. To complete your OB Express registration, visit Admitting in the hospital or the Lab in the Physician Office Building.
-  Get fitted for nursing bras at the Mom &amp; Baby Boutique in the Physician Office Building at Woman's. If you plan to return to work, research breast pumps to buy or find out if your insurance company will provide one. Pump rentals are available at the Mom &amp; Baby Boutique.
-  Find the quickest route to the Hospital (consider rush hour and other times).
-  Pack your hospital bags - one for Labor and Delivery and one for Mother/Baby.
-  Practice comfort measure techniques with your partner.
-  Relax by reading books and taking naps (things that are difficult to do with a newborn).
-  Download a contraction timer app for your phone.
-  Purchase supplies for your postnatal care.
-  Complete all of your errands.
-  Schedule last-minute salon treatments (haircut, manicure/pedicure, etc.).
-  Stock your freezer with easy-to-prepare foods.
-  Finish the final details for baby's nursery; stock the room with newborn diapers and wipes, set up the baby monitor and dust all surfaces.
-  Urinate frequently and empty your bladder completely each time. Expect some diarrhea. Frequent urination can help you progress once you are in active labor.
-  Download a feeding and diaper changing tracker app for your phone.
-  Watch for signs of labor.
-  Focus on your breathing to help you stay relaxed during labor.
-  Ultra soft toilet paper
-  Stool softeners
-  Breast pump
-  Prenatal vitamins and prescription refills
-  Hemorrhoid aids (may need)
-  Cushioned seats/cushions for seats (may need)

<!-- image -->