Use the information below to help create your plan for a healthy pregnancy.

## PRENATAL CARE

Seeing your doctor while you are pregnant is called 'prenatal care'. Start prenatal care as soon as you think you are pregnant. Follow the schedule of check-ups that your doctor recommends. At check-ups, you will learn how your body will change and how to have a healthy pregnancy.

## STAY MENTALLY AND EMOTIONALLY HEALTHY

Pregnancy brings many changes to your life, and it can be overwhelming. Being overwhelmed can affect how you feel about yourself, your ability to deal with difficulties, and your physical health. Here are ideas to help you cope with everyday life:

- Find a support person or group. Ask your partner, family, and friends to help support you through the pregnancy. Accept offers of help.
- Reduce stress. Stress affects us in many ways. It can affect your appetite, your energy level, and your ability to cope with problems. Try calling a friend or going for a walk when you feel stressed. Ask your doctor for other ideas for managing stress. If you feel blue for more than a few days, contact your doctor right away.
- Stay active! Exercise gives you more energy, improves your mood, and can even help you sleep better! Being active is healthy and safe during most pregnancies, but check with your doctor first. Walking, dancing, gardening, and swimming are all great ways to stay active. Aim for 30 minutes of activity every day.

## SLEEP

Get plenty of rest. Take a nap when you can. If you are well rested, you will feel better.

<!-- image -->

## EAT WELL

Good nutrition is important for your baby and for you.

- Regular meals and snacks help you have more energy and feel well.

Life gets busy. Set a reminder on your phone to help you remember it is time to eat!

- The extra energy you need after the first trimester is only about 200-400 calories each day. That is not much! Make those extra calories count by making healthy food choices.
- Take a prenatal vitamin as prescribed by your healthcare provider.

<!-- image -->

## KEEP YOU AND YOUR BABY SAFE

Certain drinks and substances can harm you and your baby when you are pregnant.

- Do not smoke, be around smoke, or use tobacco or marijuana. Avoid e-cigarettes. Smoking while pregnant increases your chances of getting sick and can cause your baby to be born too small or very sick. It also puts baby at risk for crib death (SIDS), stillbirth, and breathing problems like asthma.

Get help to cut back or quit. Talk with your doctor or call QUIT PARTNER at 1-800-QUIT-NOW (784-8669) or www.quitpartnermn.com .

- Drugs and alcohol hurt both you and your baby. Plus, using drugs and alcohol leads to poor choices when it comes to your life and your baby's future.

Get help to quit. Talk with your doctor. Call or visit 2-1-1 to find local resources and assistance in your area.

<!-- image -->