<!-- image -->

## For Your Benefit:

## California's Programs for the Unemployed

Unemployment Insurance Disability Insurance Paid Family Leave Workforce Services

## For Your Benefit: California's Programs for the Unemployed

| This publication provides information about programs offered by the Employment Development Department (EDD) for unemployed Californians. This is for general information only and it is not a legal document.                                                                                                                         |    |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|
| For more information, visit our website (edd.ca.gov). Unemployment Insurance (UI) .................................................................                                                                                                                                                                                   | 2  |
| State Disability Insurance (SDI) ...............................................................14 Disability Insurance (DI) is part of SDI and provides partial wage replacement benefits to workers who are unable to work due to a non-work-related illness or injury, pregnancy, or childbirth.                                   |    |
| Paid Family Leave (PFL) ...........................................................................15 PFL is part of SDI and provides partial wage replacement benefits to workers who need time off to care for a seriously ill family member, bond with a new child, or to help a family member during a qualifying military event. |    |
| Workforce Services .................................................................................15 The Workforce Services Branch offers a range of employment services for job seekers and employers.                                                                                                                             |    |

## Unemployment Insurance

Unemployment benefits are paid for by your employer and provide temporary income when you are unemployed and meet all eligibility requirements.

## Who Should File a UI Claim

You may apply for unemployment if you are out of work or your hours have been reduced.

To be eligible for benefits, you must have earned enough wages during the base period to set up a claim, and be:

- Totally or partially unemployed.
- Unemployed through no fault of your own.
- Physically able to work.
- Available for work.
- Ready and willing to accept work immediately.
- Actively looking for work.

## When to Apply

You may apply for benefits as soon as you are unemployed, or your work hours are reduced. Your claim will begin on the Sunday of the week in which you apply for benefits.

All claims have a one-week, unpaid, waiting period. The waiting period does not begin until you apply for unemployment, certify for benefits, and meet all eligibility requirements.

## What You Need to Apply

To apply, we need your:

- Name, (including all names you used while working) and Social Security number.
- Mailing and residence address (if different) and phone number.
- Last employer's complete name, address (mailing and physical location), and phone number.
- Last day worked and the reason you're no longer working (laid off, quit, fired, or left work because of a trade dispute).
- Work history during the 18 months prior to applying your claim, including out-of-state employment. Include all employers' names, dates employed, and wages earned.
- State-issued driver license number or identification card number.
- Citizenship status and if you have the legal right to work in the United States. If you indicate you're registered with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS, formerly Immigration and Naturalization Services) and authorized to work in the United States, you will be asked for the title of your employment authorization document and information from the USCIS document, such as the Alien Registration Number, card number, and expiration date.

Note : Your previous employers' names and addresses are very important, regardless of how long you worked for the employer(s). If you worked parttime, provide the number of hours you worked each week.

If you served in the military in the last 18 months, you will need to provide information from your D214 Member Copy 4.

If you worked for the federal government during the last 18 months, provide information from your Notice to Federal Employees About Unemployment Insurance, Standard Form 8 .

## Important

Making a false statement or withholding information to receive benefits can be a felony. Penalties may include fines, loss of benefits, and criminal prosecution. See more information on fraud and penalties on page 13.

## ID.me

ID.me is an identity proofing and authentication platform used by government agencies. This is a faster and easier way to verify your identity and process your claim.

- Create an ID.me account and follow the prompts.
- You will need a mobile device, tablet, or a computer to take and send a photo.
- Allow ID.me to transfer your information to us.
- Having trouble connecting? Connect with a live video agent from 4:30 a.m. to 9 p.m. (Pacific Time), through your ID.me account and send a request for help at help.id.me within ID.me.

## Employer Notification

Your last employer is notified when you apply for unemployment. Although we determine your eligibility, employers fund the UI program and are required by law to provide any information that may affect your eligibility to receive benefits.

## Types of Claims

Your application depends on the type of employer you worked for and the states where you worked.

Your application will be filed as a:

- Regular California claim if you only worked in California, even if you now live outside of California.
- Federal claim if your employment was in civilian work for the federal government.
- Military claim if you served as a member of the United States Armed Forces.
- Combined wage claim if you earned wages in California and in at least one other state during the last 18 months.

- Interstate claim application if you now live in California and only worked in another state during the last 18 months. Apply for unemployment directly with the other state, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, or Canada. If you worked in the US Virgin Islands, contact us at 1-800-300-5616.

## How to Apply

You may apply for unemployment using one of the following methods:

- Online

UI Online SM  is the fastest and most convenient way to apply for unemployment. Visit UI Online (edd.ca.gov/UI\_Online) to get started.

- Phone

Speak to an EDD representative Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays. Refer to page 20 for a list of unemployment phone numbers.

- Fax or Mail

When applying for benefits with UI Online, some customers will be instructed to fax or mail their application to us. If this occurs, the paper Unemployment Insurance Application (DE 1101I) will display for you to complete and send.

- For faster and more secure processing, fax the completed form to the number listed on the form. If mailing your unemployment application, use the address on the form and allow more time for processing.

## Beginning Date of Claim

Your claim begins on the Sunday of the week in which you apply for benefits.

## Ending Date of Claim

Your claim ends on the Saturday, 52 weeks after your claim begins. If you exhaust your benefits prior to this date, you cannot apply for another California claim until the benefit year of the claim ends.

If you worked in another state during the last 18 months, you may be eligible to apply for a new claim in that state.

## Minimum Earnings to Establish a Valid Claim

You must have at least $1,300 in earnings in one quarter of your base period or at least $900 in earnings in the highest quarter and 1.25 times your highest quarter earnings in your total base period.

For example: If you have $900 earnings in your highest quarter, you would also need to have earned a total of $1,125 in the base period ($900 x 1.25 = $1,125).

## How Unemployment Benefits are Calculated

The quarter in which you were paid the highest wages during the base period determines your weekly benefit amount (WBA). The WBA ranges from $40 to $450 per week.

The maximum benefit amount is 26 times the weekly benefit amount or one-half of the total base period wages, whichever is less.

Refer to the Unemployment Insurance Benefit Table on page 17 to estimate your WBA.

## Base Period

There are two types of base periods used to set up a claim: the standard base period and the alternate base period.

## Standard Base Period

The Standard Base Period (SBP) is the first four of the last five completed calendar quarters prior to the beginning date of the claim.

Refer to the chart below. The shaded area is the standard base period. The non-shaded area is the quarter the claim is filed.

<!-- image -->

## Alternate Base Period

If you do not have sufficient wages in the standard base period, you may qualify to file a claim using the Alternate Base Period (ABP).

The ABP is the last four completed calendar quarters prior to the beginning date of the claim.

We will automatically file an ABP claim on your behalf if you're not eligible for a SBP claim.

You may be asked to give more wage information so we can correctly calculate your benefit amount. If you receive an Affidavit of Wages (DE 23A), gather the requested documents and return them to us.

Note: The ABP can only be used when there are not enough wages earned in the standard base period to set up a claim.

Refer to the chart below. The shaded area is the ABP. The non-shaded area is the quarter the claim is filed.

<!-- image -->

## Waiting Period

Unemployment claims have a mandatory, one-week, unpaid, waiting period. This waiting period generally takes effect on the first eligible week of a claim and prior to benefits being paid. Do not wait to apply because the waiting period cannot be served until a claim has been filed.

## How to Certify for Benefits

To serve your waiting period and receive benefit payments, you must meet all eligibility requirements and certify for benefits every two weeks.

There are three ways to certify for benefits:

- UI Online: (edd.ca.gov/UI\_Online) This is the fastest way to certify for benefits and report work and wages. To use UI Online, you must create an account through myEDD and complete a one-time registration for UI Online.
- EDD Tele-Cert SM : 1-866-333-4606 Certify over the phone by calling 1-866-333-4606. Select option 2 and follow all instructions. To access EDD Tele-Cert you must create a PIN.
- Mail: Complete, sign, and mail the Continued Claim (DE 4581) form to us.

Note: For faster processing, certify through UI Online or EDD Tele-Cert.

## Payments

Payments are issued after you certify for benefits and continue to meet all eligibility requirements for every week you claim benefits.

You have an option in how you receive your benefit payments. We issue benefit payments through a prepaid debit card or by check. The debit card is the fastest and most secure way to receive your benefits. However, you do not have to accept the debit card. Once your claim is filed, contact us if you wish to receive your benefits by paper check.

The debit card is valid for three years and used for disability, Paid Family Leave (PFL), and unemployment benefits.

If you were previously issued a debit card for prior unemployment, disability, or PFL benefits and need a replacement card, you must contact the Money Network's toll-free customer-service line at 1-800-684-7051 or 1-800-684-7053 (TTY).

Learn more about the debit card (edd.ca.gov/debitcard).

## Tax Requirements

Unemployment benefits are subject to federal income tax but exempt from California state income tax. Each time you certify for benefits, you can choose to withhold the 10 percent federal income tax from your weekly benefit payment. Otherwise, you may need to pay the tax at the end of the year when you file your tax return.

Each January, we mail a Form 1099G to individuals who received unemployment during the previous calendar year. Use the form to report important tax information on your federal tax return. You can access Form 1099G information for up to the past five years or request duplicate copies through UI Online or by calling 1-866-401-2849.

## Child Support Obligations

Your unemployment benefits may be reduced if you're required to pay child support payments to a court, District Attorney's office, or other child support enforcement agency.

## Report Earnings

You must report all work, wages, and other income to us during the week they were earned, not when you receive your pay. Failure to properly report your earnings can result in overpayments and penalties.

## Types of income to report:

- Piece work
- Idle time pay
- Jury fees
- Commissions
- Witness fees
- Reuse pay
- Holiday pay
- Holding fees
- Residuals
- Awards
- Vacation pay
- In-lieu-of-notice pay
- Bonuses
- Tips
- Self-employment income
- Strike benefits
- Picket pay
- Standby pay
- Bereavement
- Back-pay
- Paid sick leave
- Workers' Compensation
- Pension
- Retirement
- Annuity

Note: Y ou must report board, lodging, meals, or any other payment you receive instead of money when you work. If you are unsure about how to report wages, contact us.

## Pension or Retirement Pay

Unemployment benefits may be reduced if you are receiving a pension, retirement pay, annuity, or other similar payment based on your previous work.

Social Security benefits are not deductible from unemployment benefits and do not need to be reported to us.

## Part-Time Work

If you work less than full-time, you must report that work to us. However, you may still be eligible for partial unemployment benefits. The first $25 or 25 percent of your gross total earnings for the week (whichever is greater) will not be counted toward your benefit amount. The amount remaining will be deducted from your weekly benefit amount.

## Example 1:

Your weekly benefit amount is $50. You earn $30. You must report the $30; however, the first $25 is not counted, leaving $5 to deduct from your weekly benefit amount. You would receive $45 ($50 minus $5) in unemployment benefits.

## Example 2:

Your weekly benefit amount is $400. You earn $200. You must report $200; however, the first 25 percent ($50) is not counted, leaving $150 to deduct from your weekly benefit amount. You would receive $250 ($400 minus $150) in unemployment benefits.

## How Your Eligibility is Determined

To be eligible, you must be:

- Out of work through no fault of your own.
- Physically able to work.
- Ready to accept work.
- Actively looking for work.

If you were laid off, you're considered to be out of work through no fault of your own.

If you quit your last job, were fired, or are unemployed due to a strike or lockout, we will schedule a phone interview with you to collect information on the reason you are no longer working. Your unemployment benefits cannot be paid until your phone interview is complete, you certify for benefits, and we determine your eligibility.

You have the right to request more time to gather information, contact witnesses, or obtain the advice of a representative. If the eligibility issue

involves an employer, we may contact the employer. If you are sent a written request for more information and you respond by mail, the interviewer will use the information you send to determine your eligibility. If you are denied benefits for any reason throughout your claim, including insufficient wages to set up a claim, a written Notice of Determination (DE 1080CZ) will be mailed to you explaining the reason along with your appeal rights. Y our benefits can be delayed or denied if you are not available

Important: for the interview or do not send the required information. We will decide your eligibility based on the information available.

## Appeals Process

If you are denied benefits, you have the legal right to appeal the decision by completing and mailing the Appeal Form (DE 1000M). To be considered timely, it must be mailed within 30 calendar days from the mailing date of the Notice of Determination (DE 1080CZ). If you miss the 30-day deadline, you may still appeal, but you must show good cause for the delay.

Your appeal will be heard by an independent administrative law judge. to cross-examination. The office of appeal will let you know when and where the hearing will be held.

Important: Y ou must continue to certify for benefits while your claim is under appeal. If the original decision is reversed, we can quickly issue all back payments to you. being denied or delayed.

Hearings are informal, but all testimony is taken under oath and is subject Before the hearing, you have the right to review all records affecting your appeal. Those records are provided by California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board (CUIAB). You can request records from us to prepare for your hearing. At the hearing, you may be represented by yourself, a union official, an attorney, or anyone else you select. You may bring any relevant documentation to support your case. After the hearing, you are mailed the administrative law judge's decision. If you are not satisfied, you may send a second level appeal to the CUIAB. For information on how the UI code is applied, including current case studies, see the Benefit Determination Guide (edd.ca.gov/uibdg). Failure to comply could result in your benefits

## Canceling a Claim

You may cancel a claim if you meet all the following criteria:

- No benefits have been paid.
- You are not disqualified for benefits due to an eligibility issue.
- An overpayment has not been established on the claim.
- You notify us before the 52-week benefit year ends.

Once a claim is canceled, it cannot be re-established with the same beginning date. You must apply for a new claim, which will have a later beginning date.

## Workers Not Covered by Unemployment Benefits

The following groups of workers are not normally covered:

- Elected officials.
- Self-employed, unless participating in elective coverage.
- Students enrolled and regularly attending classes at the school or education institution where employed.
- Members of a Limited Liability Company (LLC) that are treated as a partnership for federal income tax reporting purposes.
- A student's spouse who is working for an educational institution in an employment program provided for the purpose of financially aiding the student.
- Parents employed by their children, or children under the age of 18 employed by their parents.
- Husbands and wives employed by each other.
- Registered domestic partner employed by their registered domestic partner.
- Certain state-licensed salespersons paid only by commissions.
- Caddies and jockeys.

For more information, refer to Exempt Employment (DE 231EE) (PDF) (edd. ca.gov/siteassets/files/pdf\_pub\_ctr/de231ee.pdf) and Family Employment (DE 231FAM) (PDF) (edd.ca.gov/siteassets/files/pdf\_pub\_ctr/de231fam.pdf) for additional information.

If you do not know whether you are covered, do not waive your rights. Contact us for more information.

## Elective Coverage

Under certain conditions, employers of the individuals whose services are not covered may elect to cover those services. If you are not sure whether you are eligible for these benefits, contact us.

## Request a Claim Print Out

You may request a printout out of your claim through one of the following methods:

- Create a UI Online (edd.ca.gov/UI\_Online) account.
- Select Claim History and print.
- Call us at 1-800-300-5616.

## Special Programs

## California Training Benefits

If you are attending school or training while receiving unemployment benefits, you may qualify for California Training Benefits (CTB).

If eligible, you can further your education, upgrade your skills, or learn a new trade while attending an EDD-approved training or school program to be more competitive in today's labor market.

While in school or training, you will be exempt from the requirements to be available for work, actively seek work, and accept work. You may also be eligible for additional weeks of benefits. To learn more visit California Training Benefits (edd.ca.gov/en/unemployment/California\_Training\_ Benefits).

Note: We do not cover educational or training-related expenses such as tuition, fees, books, supplies, or transportation. However, there are state, federal, or employer programs that may fund your school or training.

## Training Extension

A Training Extension (TE) provides additional benefits to individuals who have been approved for CTB, while completing school or training. Only one TE is allowed for each CTB-approved training period.

If interested, you must contact us to inquire about a TE before receiving the 16th week of unemployment benefits. For claims that have less than 16 weeks of benefits, you must contact us before the claim reaches a zero balance.

## Disaster Unemployment Assistance

The federal Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program gives financial help to individuals whose employment or self-employment has been lost or interrupted as a direct result of a major disaster and who are not eligible for regular unemployment benefits. These benefits are available only when the President of the United States declares a major disaster and makes this special assistance available.

If DUA benefits are available, information will be posted on our website (edd.ca.gov).

## Trade Adjustment Assistance

The Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program is a federally funded program that gives benefits and services to eligible workers who are certified by the US Department of Labor (DOL) as having lost their jobs, or had their hours and wages reduced, because of foreign trade. Types of benefits include training, employment and case-management services, job

search and relocation allowances, income support, and wage subsidies. To learn more, visit TAA Programs (edd.ca.gov/en/jobs\_and\_training/trade\_ act).

The wage subsidy program provides wage subsidies to individuals aged 50 or older who return to work earning less than their former trade impacted employment.

## Extended Benefits

Extended benefits are available to workers who have exhausted regular unemployment insurance benefits when the unemployment rate equals or exceeds a certain percentage established by state or federal law or when the federal government approves special extended benefit legislation.

## Work Sharing

The Work Sharing program helps participating employers minimize or eliminate the need for layoffs if the business's production or services have been reduced. It allows employers to keep trained employees and quickly recover when business conditions improve.

To participate, an employer must apply and meet all requirements, including, but not limited to:

- Be a legally registered business in California.
- A minimum of two employees and at least 10 percent of your regular workforce must be affected by a reduction of at least 10 percent and no more than 60 percent in both hours worked and wages earned.
- Health and retirement benefits must stay the same as before, or they must meet the same standards as other employees who are not participating in Work Sharing.
- The employees' bargaining unit must agree to voluntarily participate and sign the application for Work Sharing.

With Work Sharing, participating employees whose hours and wages have been reduced can:

- Receive UI benefits corresponding to the percentage of their work hours and wages.
- Keep their current job.
- Avoid financial hardships.

To learn more, visit Work Sharing Program (edd.ca.gov/en/Unemployment/ Work\_Sharing\_Program).

## Partial Claims

Like our Work Sharing Program, Partial Claims is an alternative to layoffs and allows employers to keep staff by reducing their earnings.

The employer certifies that the employee is expected to return to work

and gives the employee the Notice of Reduced Earnings (DE 2063) (PDF) (edd.ca.gov/siteassets/files/pdf\_pub\_ctr/de2063.pdf) or Notice of Reduced Earnings (Fisherperson) (DE 2063F) (edd.ca.gov/siteassets/files/pdf\_pub\_ctr/ de2063f.pdf) to apply for unemployment.

Employees participating in this program are considered partially employed and are not required to look for a new job to receive benefits.

To learn more, visit Partial Claims (edd.ca.gov/en/unemployment/partial\_ claims).

## Railroad Unemployment Benefits

Railroad workers may claim benefits under the U.S. Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act. This program is administered by the U.S. Railroad Retirement Board (RRB).

To apply, call the toll-free number at 1-877-772-5772 between 9 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday to speak to an RRB representative or apply online at US Railroad Retirement Board at US Railroad Retirement Board (rrb.gov).

## Unemployment Insurance Fraud Prevention and Detection

We take the security of personal and confidential information very seriously. Therefore, all data submitted to us is encrypted. Additional safeguards are built in to further protect your personal information from imposter fraud and identity theft.

Imposter fraud occurs when someone intentionally applies for unemployment using another person's employment or personal information. We actively investigate cases of imposter fraud and are committed to protecting the identities of legitimate claimants.

If we suspect that there may be identity issues, you will receive a written request to confirm the information provided. We will also contact your former employers and governmental entities to verify your documents and information.

For more information, download the Protect Your Identity and Stop Unemployment Insurance Imposter Fraud (DE 2360EE) (PDF) brochure (edd.ca.gov/pdf\_pub\_ctr/de2360ee.pdf).

To report UI fraud, visit Ask EDD (askedd.edd.ca.gov) and select Report Fraud to send a Fraud Reporting Form online, or call the EDD toll-free fraud hotline at 1-800-229-6297.

## Penalties

Making a false statement or withholding information to receive benefits can be a felony. Penalties may include a loss of benefits, a false statement disqualification, and criminal prosecution.

A false statement disqualification denies benefits from 2 to 23 weeks. The disqualification stays on your record for three years or until served, whichever comes first. To serve false statement weeks, you must continue to certify for unemployment benefits, and meet all other eligibility requirements. You will not be paid during this time.

## Benefit Audits

We conduct audits by cross-referencing employer information with claim information to determine if a customer properly reported all work, wages, and other income to us while collecting unemployment benefits. Overpayments and penalties collected from these audits ensure the solvency of the UI Trust Fund and help reduce UI taxes.

## Social Security Number Verification

We may require you to verify your Social Security number (SSN) as issued to you by the Social Security Administration (SSA).

Your eligibility for benefits may be affected if:

- The SSN provided is assigned to a different name or belongs to another individual.
- The SSN is not valid.
- The SSN was never issued by the SSA.
- The wages in the base period belong to another individual.
- The date of birth at the SSA is different than the date of birth you gave when you applied.

If we require you to verify your SSN, you may be asked to send a complete copy of your Annual Social Security Statement. To obtain a copy of your complete Social Security Statement visit the SSA online (ssa.gov).

A copy of your Social Security card will not satisfy this requirement.

## State Disability Insurance (SDI)

State Disability Insurance (SDI) is made up of Disability Insurance (DI) and Paid Family Leave (PFL). The program is funded entirely by California workers through employee payroll deductions, noted as CASDI on paystubs.

## Exceptions:

- Employees of local public entities (except workers in district hospitals) are not covered by SDI unless the employer elects such coverage.
- Employees of the state or state-funded institutions of higher education may, through their collective bargaining units, elect to be covered by SDI.
- Self-employed individuals may elect to be covered by SDI.

Note: Citizenship and immigration status do not affect eligibility for SDI.

DE 2320 Rev. 67 (1-24) (INTERNET) Page 14 of 22

## Disability Insurance

Disability Insurance (DI) provides short-term, partial wage replacement benefits to eligible workers who are unable to work due to a non-workrelated illness, injury, or pregnancy.

When to file a claim: Submit your claim no earlier than 9 days after the first day your disability begins, but no later than 49 days after your disability begins or you may lose benefits.

For faster processing, file your claim using SDI Online (edd.ca.gov/en/ Disability/SDI\_Online).

Exception: If a claim is filed for the same or related cause or condition within 60 days of the initial claim, there is no new waiting period.

To file a claim or learn more, visit State Disability Insurance (edd.ca.gov/ disability). EDD staff are available from Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays.

Refer to page 20 for a list of DI phone numbers.

## Paid Family Leave

Paid Family Leave (PFL) provides short-term, partial wage replacement benefits to eligible workers who need to take time off work to care for a seriously ill child, parent, parent-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, sibling, spouse, or registered domestic partner. Benefits are available to parents who need time to bond with a new child entering their family either by birth, adoption, or foster care placement. Benefits are also available for individuals who need time off work to participate in a qualifying event resulting from a spouse, registered domestic partner, parent, or child's military deployment to a foreign country.

When to file a claim: Submit your claim no earlier than the first day your family leave begins, but no later than 41 days after your family leave begins or you may lose benefits.

For faster processing, file your claim using SDI Online (edd.ca.gov/en/ Disability/SDI\_Online).

To file, or learn more visit Paid Family Leave (edd.ca.gov/en/disability/paidfamily-leave).

Our staff are available Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays.

Refer to page 20 for a list of PFL phone numbers.

## Workforce Services

In partnership with state and local agencies, we offer a range of employment and training services, for job seekers at no cost, through the America's Job Center of California SM  (AJCC).

Through the AJCCs, we support job seekers with job search and resume workshops, job fairs, and referrals to other workforce partners, and much more. For more information, find your nearest AJCC by using the Office Locator (edd.ca.gov/Office\_Locator).

## CalJOBS SM

CalJOBS is California's online resource to help job seekers and employers navigate our workforce services. CalJOBS SM  allows users to easily search for jobs, build resumes, access career resources, find qualified candidates for employment, and gather information on education and training programs.

## Job seekers can:

- Create a resume or upload multiple resumes.
- Search and apply for job openings.
- Set up alerts for job openings.
- Research employers.
- Make customized resumes viewable to employers.

Note: Registering for a CalJOBS account and posting a resume is an eligibility requirement for many unemployment claimants. To register, visit CalJOBS (caljobs.ca.gov).

## Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Outreach Program

The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker (MSFW) Outreach program helps farmworkers unfamiliar with the services provided at the AJCC. These no cost services include:

- Referrals to local supportive services.
- General information about unemployment and disability insurance.
- Help with employment services and employment related law complaints.
- Information about farmworker employment rights.
- Help with job search, job screening and referrals to jobs.

## Services for Veterans

We offer services for veterans to help them achieve their employment and training goals. Services include labor market information, veteran 24-hour priority hold on all job listings, customized job search help, job fairs, workshops, employer recruitments, and other resources.

## Youth Employment Opportunity Program

The Youth Employment Opportunity Program provides special services to help youth, ages 15 to 25 years, achieve their educational and vocational goals. Services include peer advising, referrals to supportive services, workshops, job referrals and placement assistance, and referrals to training and community outreach efforts.

For more information on the programs and services listed above, visit Jobs and Training (edd.ca.gov/Jobs\_and\_Training).

## Unemployment Insurance Benefit Table For New Claims with a Beginning Date of January 2, 2005 or After

Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $ 900.00 948.99 $40 949.00 974.99 41 975.00 1,000.99 42 1,001.00 1,026.99 43 1,027.00 1,052.99 44 1,053.00 1,078.99 45 1,079.00 1,117.99 46 1,118.00 -   1,143.99 47 1,144.00 -   1,169.99 48 1,170.00 -   1,195.99 49 1,196.00 -   1,221.99 50 1,222.00 -   1,247.99 51 1,248.00 -   1,286.99 52 1,287.00 -   1,312.99 53 1,313.00 -   1,338.99 54 1,339.00 -   1,364.99 55 1,365.00 -   1,403.99 56 1,404.00 -   1,429.99 57 1,430.00 -   1,455.99 58 1,456.00 -   1,494.99 59 1,495.00 -   1,520.99 60 1,521.00 -   1,546.99 61 1,547.00 -   1,585.99 62 1,586.00 -   1,611.99 63 1,612.00 -   1,637.99 64 1,638.00 -   1,676.99 65 1,677.00 -   1,702.99 66 1,703.00 -   1,741.99 67 1,742.00 -   1,767.99 68 1,768.00 -   1,806.99 69 1,807.00 -   1,832.99 70 1,833.00 -   1,846.00 71 1,846.01 -   1,872.00 72 1,872.01 -   1,898.00 73 1,898.01 -   1,924.00 74 1,924.01 -   1,950.00 75 1,950.01 -   1,976.00 76 1,976.01 -   2,002.00 77 2,002.01 -   2,028.00 78 2,028.01 -   2,054.00 79 2,054.01 -   2,080.00 80 2,080.01 -   2,106.00 81 2,106.01 -   2,132.00 82 2,132.01 -   2,158.00 83 2,158.01 -   2,184.00 84 2,184.01 -   2,210.00 85 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  2,210.01 -   2,236.00 $86 2,236.01 -   2,262.00 87 2,262.01 -   2,288.00 88 2,288.01 -   2,314.00 89 2,314.01 -   2,340.00 90 2,340.01 -   2,366.00 91 2,366.01 -   2,392.00 92 2,392.01 -   2,418.00 93 2,418.01 -   2,444.00 94 2,444.01 -   2,470.00 95 2,470.01 -   2,496.00 96 2,496.01 -   2,522.00 97 2,522.01 -   2,548.00 98 2,548.01 -   2,574.00 99 2,574.01 -   2,600.00 100 2,600.01 -   2,626.00 101 2,626.01 -   2,652.00 102 2,652.01 -   2,678.00 103 2,678.01 -   2,704.00 104 2,704.01 -   2,730.00 105 2,730.01 -   2,756.00 106 2,756.01 -   2,782.00 107 2,782.01 -   2,808.00 108 2,808.01 -   2,834.00 109 2,834.01 -   2,860.00 110 2,860.01 -   2,886.00 111 2,886.01 -   2,912.00 112 2,912.01 -   2,938.00 113 2,938.01 -   2,964.00 114 2,964.01 -   2,990.00 115 2,990.01 -   3,016.00 116 3,016.01 -   3,042.00 117 3,042.01 -   3,068.00 118 3,068.01 -   3,094.00 119 3,094.01 -   3,120.00 120 3,120.01 -   3,146.00 121 3,146.01 -   3,172.00 122 3,172.01 -   3,198.00 123 3,198.01 -   3,224.00 124 3,224.01 -   3,250.00 125 3,250.01 -   3,276.00 126 3,276.01 -   3,302.00 127 3,302.01 -   3,328.00 128 3,328.01 -   3,354.00 129 3,354.01 -   3,380.00 130 3,380.01 -   3,406.00 131 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  3,406.01 -   3,432.00 $132 3,432.01 -   3,458.00 133 3,458.01 -   3,484.00 134 3,484.01 -   3,510.00 135 3,510.01 -   3,536.00 136 3,536.01 -   3,562.00 137 3,562.01 -   3,588.00 138 3,588.01 -   3,614.00 139 3,614.01 -   3,640.00 140 3,640.01 -   3,666.00 141 3,666.01 -   3,692.00 142 3,692.01 -   3,718.00 143 3,718.01 -   3,744.00 144 3,744.01 -   3,770.00 145 3,770.01 -   3,796.00 146 3,796.01 -   3,822.00 147 3,822.01 -   3,848.00 148 3,848.01 -   3,874.00 149 3,874.01 -   3,900.00 150 3,900.01 -   3,926.00 151 3,926.01 -   3,952.00 152 3,952.01 -   3,978.00 153 3,978.01 -   4,004.00 154 4,004.01 -   4,030.00 155 4,030.01 -   4,056.00 156 4,056.01 -   4,082.00 157 4,082.01 -   4,108.00 158 4,108.01 -   4,134.00 159 4,134.01 -   4,160.00 160 4,160.01 -   4,186.00 161 4,186.01 -   4,212.00 162 4,212.01 -   4,238.00 163 4,238.01 -   4,264.00 164 4,264.01 -   4,290.00 165 4,290.01 -   4,316.00 166 4,316.01 -   4,342.00 167 4,342.01 -   4,368.00 168 4,368.01 -   4,394.00 169 4,394.01 -   4,420.00 170 4,420.01 -   4,446.00 171 4,446.01 -   4,472.00 172 4,472.01 -   4,498.00 173 4,498.01 -   4,524.00 174 4,524.01 -   4,550.00 175 4,550.01 -   4,576.00 176 4,576.01 -   4,602.00 177

## Unemployment Insurance Benefit Table For New Claims with a Beginning Date of January 2, 2005 or After

Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  4,602.01 -   4,628.00 $178 4,628.01 -   4,654.00 179 4,654.01 -   4,680.00 180 4,680.01 -   4,706.00 181 4,706.01 -   4,732.00 182 4,732.01 -   4,758.00 183 4,758.01 -   4,784.00 184 4,784.01 -   4,810.00 185 4,810.01 -   4,836.00 186 4,836.01 -   4,862.00 187 4,862.01 -   4,888.00 188 4,888.01 -   4,914.00 189 4,914.01 -   4,940.00 190 4,940.01 -   4,966.00 191 4,966.01 -   4,992.00 192 4,992.01 -   5,018.00 193 5,018.01 -   5,044.00 194 5,044.01 -   5,070.00 195 5,070.01 -   5,096.00 196 5,096.01 -   5,122.00 197 5,122.01 -   5,148.00 198 5,148.01 -   5,174.00 199 5,174.01 -   5,200.00 200 5,200.01 -   5,226.00 201 5,226.01 -   5,252.00 202 5,252.01 -   5,278.00 203 5,278.01 -   5,304.00 204 5,304.01 -   5,330.00 205 5,330.01 -   5,356.00 206 5,356.01 -   5,382.00 207 5,382.01 -   5,408.00 208 5,408.01 -   5,434.00 209 5,434.01 -   5,460.00 210 5,460.01 -   5,486.00 211 5,486.01 -   5,512.00 212 5,512.01 -   5,538.00 213 5,538.01 -   5,564.00 214 5,564.01 -   5,590.00 215 5,590.01 -   5,616.00 216 5,616.01 -   5,642.00 217 5,642.01 -   5,668.00 218 5,668.01 -   5,694.00 219 5,694.01 -   5,720.00 220 5,720.01 -   5,746.00 221 5,746.01 -   5,772.00 222 5,772.01 -   5,798.00 223 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  5,798.01 -   5,824.00 $224 5,824.01 -   5,850.00 225 5,850.01 -   5,876.00 226 5,876.01 -   5,902.00 227 5,902.01 -   5,928.00 228 5,928.01 -   5,954.00 229 5,954.01 -   5,980.00 230 5,980.01 -   6,006.00 231 6,006.01 -   6,032.00 232 6,032.01 -   6,058.00 233 6,058.01 -   6,084.00 234 6,084.01 -   6,110.00 235 6,110.01 -   6,136.00 236 6,136.01 -   6,162.00 237 6,162.01 -   6,188.00 238 6,188.01 -   6,214.00 239 6,214.01 -   6,240.00 240 6,240.01 -   6,266.00 241 6,266.01 -   6,292.00 242 6,292.01 -   6,318.00 243 6,318.01 -   6,344.00 244 6,344.01 -   6,370.00 245 6,370.01 -   6,396.00 246 6,396.01 -   6,422.00 247 6,422.01 -   6,448.00 248 6,448.01 -   6,474.00 249 6,474.01 -   6,500.00 250 6,500.01 -   6,526.00 251 6,526.01 -   6,552.00 252 6,552.01 -   6,578.00 253 6,578.01 -   6,604.00 254 6,604.01 -   6,630.00 255 6,630.01 -   6,656.00 256 6,656.01 -   6,682.00 257 6,682.01 -   6,708.00 258 6,708.01 -   6,734.00 259 6,734.01 -   6,760.00 260 6,760.01 -   6,786.00 261 6,786.01 -   6,812.00 262 6,812.01 -   6,838.00 263 6,838.01 -   6,864.00 264 6,864.01 -   6,890.00 265 6,890.01 -   6,916.00 266 6,916.01 -   6,942.00 267 6,942.01 -   6,968.00 268 6,968.01 -   6,994.00 269 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  6,994.01 -   7,020.00 $270 7,020.01 -   7,046.00 271 7,046.01 -   7,072.00 272 7,072.01 -   7,098.00 273 7,098.01 -   7,124.00 274 7,124.01 -   7,150.00 275 7,150.01 -   7,176.00 276 7,176.01 -   7,202.00 277 7,202.01 -   7,228.00 278 7,228.01 -   7,254.00 279 7,254.01 -   7,280.00 280 7,280.01 -   7,306.00 281 7,306.01 -   7,332.00 282 7,332.01 -   7,358.00 283 7,358.01 -   7,384.00 284 7,384.01 -   7,410.00 285 7,410.01 -   7,436.00 286 7,436.01 -   7,462.00 287 7,462.01 -   7,488.00 288 7,488.01 -   7,514.00 289 7,514.01 -   7,540.00 290 7,540.01 -   7,566.00 291 7,566.01 -   7,592.00 292 7,592.01 -   7,618.00 293 7,618.01 -   7,644.00 294 7,644.01 -   7,670.00 295 7,670.01 -   7,696.00 296 7,696.01 -   7,722.00 297 7,722.01 -   7,748.00 298 7,748.01 -   7,774.00 299 7,774.01 -   7,800.00 300 7,800.01 -   7,826.00 301 7,826.01 -   7,852.00 302 7,852.01 -   7,878.00 303 7,878.01 -   7,904.00 304 7,904.01 -   7,930.00 305 7,930.01 -   7,956.00 306 7,956.01 -   7,982.00 307 7,982.01 -   8,008.00 308 8,008.01 -   8,034.00 309 8,034.01 -   8,060.00 310 8,060.01 -   8,086.00 311 8,086.01 -   8,112.00 312 8,112.01 -   8,138.00 313 8,138.01 -   8,164.00 314 8,164.01 -   8,190.00 315

## Unemployment Insurance Benefit Table For New Claims with a Beginning Date of January 2, 2005 or After

Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  8,190.01 -   8,216.00 $316 8,216.01 -   8,242.00 317 8,242.01 -   8,268.00 318 8,268.01 -   8,294.00 319 8,294.01 -   8,320.00 320 8,320.01 -   8,346.00 321 8,346.01 -   8,372.00 322 8,372.01 -   8,398.00 323 8,398.01 -   8,424.00 324 8,424.01 -   8,450.00 325 8,450.01 -   8,476.00 326 8,476.01 -   8,502.00 327 8,502.01 -   8,528.00 328 8,528.01 -   8,554.00 329 8,554.01 -   8,580.00 330 8,580.01 -   8,606.00 331 8,606.01 -   8,632.00 332 8,632.01 -   8,658.00 333 8,658.01 -   8,684.00 334 8,684.01 -   8,710.00 335 8,710.01 -   8,736.00 336 8,736.01 -   8,762.00 337 8,762.01 -   8,788.00 338 8,788.01 -   8,814.00 339 8,814.01 -   8,840.00 340 8,840.01 -   8,866.00 341 8,866.01 -   8,892.00 342 8,892.01 -   8,918.00 343 8,918.01 -   8,944.00 344 8,944.01 -   8,970.00 345 8,970.01 -   8,996.00 346 8,996.01 -   9,022.00 347 9,022.01 -   9,048.00 348 9,048.01 -   9,074.00 349 9,074.01 -   9,100.00 350 9,100.01 -   9,126.00 351 9,126.01 -   9,152.00 352 9,152.01 -   9,178.00 353 9,178.01 -   9,204.00 354 9,204.01 -   9,230.00 355 9,230.01 -   9,256.00 356 9,256.01 -   9,282.00 357 9,282.01 -   9,308.00 358 9,308.01 -   9,334.00 359 9,334.01 -   9,360.00 360 9,360.01 -   9,386.00 361 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $  9,386.01 -   9,412.00 $362 9,412.01 -   9,438.00 363 9,438.01 -   9,464.00 364 9,464.01 -   9,490.00 365 9,490.01 -   9,516.00 366 9,516.01 -   9,542.00 367 9,542.01 -   9,568.00 368 9,568.01 -   9,594.00 369 9,594.01 -   9,620.00 370 9,620.01 -   9,646.00 371 9,646.01 -   9,672.00 372 9,672.01 -   9,698.00 373 9,698.01 -   9,724.00 374 9,724.01 -   9,750.00 375 9,750.01 -   9,776.00 376 9,776.01 -   9,802.00 377 9,802.01 -   9,828.00 378 9,828.01 -   9,854.00 379 9,854.01 -   9,880.00 380 9,880.01 -   9,906.00 381 9,906.01 -   9,932.00 382 9,932.01 -   9,958.00 383 9,958.01 -   9,984.00 384 9,984.01 -   10,010.00 385 10,010.01 -   10,036.00 386 10,036.01 -   10,062.00 387 10,062.01 -   10,088.00 388 10,088.01 -   10,114.00 389 10,114.01 -   10,140.00 390 10,140.01 -   10,166.00 391 10,166.01 - 10,192.00 392 10,192.01 -   10,218.00 393 10,218.01 -   10,244.00 394 10,244.01 -   10,270.00 395 10,270.01 -   10,296.00 396 10,296.01 - 10,322.00 397 10,322.01 - 10,348.00 398 10,348.01 -   10,374.00 399 10,374.01 -   10,400.00 400 10,400.01 -   10,426.00 401 10,426.01 -   10,452.00 402 10,452.01 - 10,478.00 403 10,478.01 - 10,504.00 404 10,504.01 - 10,530.00 405 10,530.01 -   10,556.00 406 10,556.01 - 10,582.00 407 Amount of Wages in Highest Quarter Weekly Benefit Amount $10,582.01 - 10,608.00 $408 10,608.01 -   10,634.00 409 10,634.01 -   10,660.00 410 10,660.01 -   10,686.00 411 10,686.01 -   10,712.00 412 10,712.01 - 10,738.00 413 10,738.01 -   10,764.00 414 10,764.01 - 10,790.00 415 10,790.01 -   10,816.00 416 10,816.01 - 10,842.00 417 10,842.01 -   10,868.00 418 10,868.01 -   10,894.00 419 10,894.01 -   10,920.00 420 10,920.01 -   10,946.00 421 10,946.01 -   10,972.00 422 10,972.01 -   10,998.00 423 10,998.01 - 11,024.00 424 11,024.01 -   11,050.00 425 11,050.01 -   11,076.00 426 11,076.01 - 11,102.00 427 11,102.01 -   11,128.00 428 11,128.01 - 11,154.00 429 11,154.01 - 11,180.00 430 11,180.01 - 11,206.00 431 11,206.01 -   11,232.00 432 11,232.01 -   11,258.00 433 11,258.01 -   11,284.00 434 11,284.01 -   11,310.00 435 11,310.01 - 11,336.00 436 11,336.01 - 11,362.00 437 11,362.01 -   11,388.00 438 11,388.01 - 11,414.00 439 11,414.01 -   11,440.00 440 11,440.01 - 11,466.00 441 11,466.01 -   11,492.00 442 11,492.01 - 11,518.00 443 11,518.01 - 11,544.00 444 11,544.01 -   11,570.00 445 11,570.01 -   11,596.00 446 11,596.01 -   11,622.00 447 11,622.01 -   11,648.00 448 11,648.01 - 11,674.00 449 11,674.01 and over 450

## How to Get Help Online

-  To learn more about EDD services and programs, visit EDD online (edd.ca.gov).
-  To ask us a question, access your UI Online or SDI account visit Ask EDD (askedd.edd.ca.gov).
-  To find your nearest AJCC, visit the Office Locator online (edd.ca.gov/en/ Office\_Locator).

## Phone

All our phone numbers are toll free. For relay service, provide one of the numbers below to the operator.

## Unemployment Insurance

EDD staff are available Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays.

| English   | 1-800-300-5616   | Mandarin   | 1-866-303-0706   |
|-----------|------------------|------------|------------------|
| Spanish   | 1-800-326-8937   | Vietnamese | 1-800-547-2058   |
| Armenian  | 1-855-528-1518   | Tagalog    | 1-866-395-1513   |
| Cantonese | 1-800-547-3506   | TTY        | 1-800-815-9387   |
| Korean    | 1-844-660-0877   |            |                  |

## Disability Insurance

EDD staff are available Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays.

English

1-800-480-3287

Spanish

1-866-658-8846

TTY

1-800-563-2441

## Paid Family Leave

EDD staff are available Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Pacific Time), except on state holidays.

| English   | 1-877-238-4373   | Punjabi    | 1-866-627-1568   |
|-----------|------------------|------------|------------------|
| Spanish   | 1-877-379-3819   | Tagalog    | 1-866-627-1569   |
| Armenian  | 1-866-627-1567   | Vietnamese | 1-866-692-5596   |
| Cantonese | 1-866-692-5595   | TTY        | 1-800-445-1312   |

<!-- image -->

## STATE OF CALIFORNIA

## LABOR AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

## EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT

This For Your Benefit: California's Programs for the Unemployed (DE 2320) publication can be viewed, printed, and ordered online by visiting Online Forms and Publications (forms.edd.ca.gov/forms).

The EDD is an equal opportunity employer/program. Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.

Disclaimer: If you opted out of receiving paper forms, it may still be necessary for the EDD to send some documents via U.S. mail.